Recovery from job stress
Author(s): SABINE SONNENTAG and CHARLOTTE FRITZ
Source: Journal of Organizational Behavior , February 2015, Vol. 36, No. S1 (February
2015), pp. S72-S103
Published by: Wiley
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26610962
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms

Wiley is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Journal of
Organizational Behavior

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

The IRIOP Annual Review

Journal of Organizational Behavior, J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
Published online 11 April 2014 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.1002/job.1924

Recovery from job stress: The stressor-detachment
model as an integrative framework
SABINE SONNENTAG1* AND CHARLOTTE FRITZ2
1
2

Summary

Department of Psychology, University of Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany
Department of Psychology, Portland State University, Portland, Oregon, U.S.A.

This paper reviews empirical evidence on psychological detachment from work during nonwork time. Psychological detachment as a core recovery experience refers to refraining from job-related activities and thoughts
during nonwork time; it implies to mentally disengage from one’s job while being away from work. Using the
stressor-detachment model as an organizing framework, we describe ﬁndings from between-person and withinperson studies, relying on cross-sectional, longitudinal, and daily-diary designs. Overall, research shows that
job stressors, particularly workload, predict low levels of psychological detachment. A lack of detachment in turn
predicts high strain levels and poor individual well-being (e.g., burnout and lower life satisfaction). Psychological
detachment seems to be both a mediator and a moderator in the relationship between job stressors on the one hand
and strain and poor well-being on the other hand. We propose possible extensions of the stressor-detachment
model by suggesting moderator variables grounded in the transactional stress model. We further discuss avenues
for future research and offer practical implications. Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Keywords: recovery; stress; strain; well-being; work engagement

Work in modern organizations is very demanding. Employees face high levels of workload and increased job insecurity,
often accompanied by high cognitive and emotional demands as well as continuous organizational change efforts
(American Psychological Association, 2013; Casey, 2012; Eurofond, 2012). To successfully meet these demands and
to stay healthy, it is not enough that employees are highly skilled, knowledgeable, and motivated (Ployhart & Moliterno,
2011). They also need to be in optimal physical and psychological states in order to maintain high levels of energy,
focus, and engagement over time (Bakker, 2011). Research in organizational psychology and related ﬁelds has identiﬁed
recovery from work as an important mechanism that explains how employees can stay energetic, engaged, and healthy,
even when facing high job demands (Sonnentag, Binnewies, & Mojza, 2010; Trougakos, Beal, Green, & Weiss, 2008).
Recovery from work refers to the process of reducing or eliminating physical and psychological strain symptoms that
have been caused by job demands and stressful events at work (Craig & Cooper, 1992; Meijman & Mulder, 1998).
In recent years, the number of empirical studies on recovery from work has increased substantially (e.g., Bakker,
Demerouti, Oerlemans, & Sonnentag, 2013; Davidson et al., 2010; Fritz, Sonnentag, Spector, & McInroe, 2010). Overall, these studies demonstrated that recovery processes during leisure time predict employee strain reactions, well-being,
and job-related behaviors. One particularly powerful recovery experience is psychological detachment from work
during nonwork time. Psychological detachment means refraining from job-related activities and mentally disengaging
from work during time off the job. Of course, psychological detachment is not the only experience that supports the
recovery process. For instance, experiences such as relaxation, mastery, control, meaning, and afﬁliation are important
as well (Newman, Tay, & Diener, in press; Sonnentag & Fritz, 2007). We focus on psychological detachment because it
is a prototypical recovery experience and because it has been shown to have particularly strong associations with
employee outcomes (Sonnentag & Fritz, 2007).

*Correspondence to: Sabine Sonnentag, Department of Psychology, University of Mannheim, Schloss Ehrenhof Ost, D-68131 Mannheim,
Germany. E-mail: sonnentag@uni-mannheim.de

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Received 4 January 2013
Revised 3 January 2014, Accepted 22 January 2014

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S73

A literature search in the PsycInfo database conducted in November 2013 identiﬁed 11 journal papers that addressed
psychological detachment as a recovery experience in the years between 1998 and 2009 and 32 between 2010 and
2013, demonstrating a rapid growth of this research area. Most of these studies are based on rather broad conceptualizations of recovery processes and personal resources (e.g., effort recovery model, Meijman & Mulder, 1998; conservation of resources theory, Hobfoll, 1998) and lack a coherent framework that speciﬁcally focuses on the detachment
experience. A comprehensive model on the role of psychological detachment in the job-stress context is missing. Such
a model, however, is highly needed in order to explain how and when stressful work experiences translate into poor
health and well-being. By speciﬁcally focusing on psychological detachment as a core recovery experience, such a
model helps in better understanding the psychological mechanisms underlying the stressor–strain process.
In this review, we provide an overview of empirical research on psychological detachment from work during
nonwork time by organizing the ﬁndings within a stressor-detachment model (Sonnentag, 2010). In essence, the
stressor-detachment model proposes that job stressors impede psychological detachment from work during nonwork
time, mainly because job stressors increase negative activation—a state that makes it difﬁcult to psychologically
detach from work. Thus, the model suggests that when employees are exposed to job stressors, they ﬁnd it more
difﬁcult to psychologically detach from work—although they are in a particular need for detachment and recovery
(deCroon, Sluiter, Blonk, Broersen, & Frings-Dresen, 2004). A lack of psychological detachment in turn will further
increase strain reactions and impair affective states and well-being. Lack of psychological detachment is a partial
mediator linking job stressors and strains. Moreover, the stressor-detachment model proposes that psychological
detachment attenuates the association between job stressors and strains.
Our review goes beyond earlier review chapters and articles on job stress that have focused on coping processes
(Dewe & Cooper, 2007), job-stress interventions (Bowling, Beehr, & Grebner, 2012), or agency and interpretation
processes (Daniels, 2011). Speciﬁcally, it targets psychological detachment as one powerful mechanism in the
stressor–strain process. Thereby, it is also more focused than previous reviews that covered recovery processes more
widely (Demerouti, Bakker, Geurts, & Taris, 2009; Geurts & Sonnentag, 2006). At the same time, it broadens the
scope by not only focusing on day-level studies (Demerouti et al., 2009) and by including the extensive research that
has been published during very recent years.
Our review is organized as follows: after introducing the core concepts to be examined, we will describe the stressordetachment model addressing various time perspectives. We will then review empirical research on the relationship
between lack of psychological detachment from work on the one hand and strain and poor well-being on the other hand.
Thereafter, we will summarize empirical evidence on the relationship between job stressors and lack of psychological
detachment, including research on mediator and moderator effects. In the discussion section, we will suggest an
extended stressor-detachment model and will describe avenues for future research as well as practical implications.

Core Concepts
In this section, we introduce the core constructs of the stressor-detachment model: (1) job stressors; (2) strain reactions
and well-being; and (3) psychological detachment from work during nonwork time.

Job stressors
Job stressors refer to factors in the work environment that may lead to strain reactions such as negative arousal, physical
symptoms, or psychological impairments (Kahn & Byosiere, 1992). Job stressors can be grouped in various categories,
including physical stressors, task-related stressors, role stressors, social stressors, career-related stressors, traumatic
events, and stressful change processes (Sonnentag & Frese, 2012). Among the job stressors that received extensive
research attention are task-related stressors (e.g., time pressure and work overload, work complexity, interruptions,
and situational constraints that potentially interfere with task performance), role stressors (role overload, role
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S74

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

conﬂict, and role ambiguity), and social stressors (e.g., incivility, violence, harassment, and abusive supervision). Most
types of stressors may occur as single events (i.e., acute stressors) but can also be present over extended periods of time
(i.e., chronic stressors). If stressors actually have a negative impact on individuals largely depends on appraisal and
coping processes (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984).

Strain reactions and well-being
Strain reactions can be described as an individual’s reactions to stressors and include immediate physiological
responses (e.g., elevated adrenaline or cortisol levels and increased heart rate and blood pressure), psychological
reactions (e.g., increase in negative affect and fatigue), and behavior (e.g., argument with a co-worker). Strain
reactions may still be present after the experienced stressor has been removed, for instance when being at home
in the evening. If stressors persist over a long time, strain reactions might become chronic, resulting in impairments
of physical and psychological health (e.g., cardiovascular disease and burnout). The experience of stressors may also
be associated with a decrease in individual well-being (e.g., reduced life satisfaction or reduced vigor).
Research on psychological detachment has differentiated between short-term and longer-term strain symptoms
and thereby has focused on psychological reactions. Until now, it has largely neglected physiological as well as
behavioral reactions; from a research strategy perspective, it makes sense to capture the most obvious outcomes ﬁrst
and to address physiological processes as underlying mechanisms and behavioral responses as consequences of
psychological reactions later. In terms of psychological reactions, the detachment literature has paid particular attention to negative affect as a short-term reaction and to exhaustion as a longer-term outcome. Research on psychological detachment has also addressed well-being indicators as potential psychological consequences. Accordingly, in
this paper, we focus on psychological reactions. With respect to short-term reactions, we will focus on negative and
positive affective states. With respect to long-term reactions, we will examine burnout and health complaints as
strain indicators and life satisfaction as well as work engagement as indicators of well-being.

Psychological detachment
Etzion, Eden, and Lapidot (1998) coined the term detachment within respite research by describing it as “the
individual’s sense of being away from the work situation” (p. 579). It refers to a subjective experience and goes
beyond the pure physical distance from one’s workplace. To emphasize this experiential aspect, Sonnentag and
Bayer (2005) introduced the concept psychological detachment into research on stress and recovery. Speciﬁcally,
psychological detachment from work during nonwork time means to disengage oneself psychologically from work
when being away from the workplace. First, it implies not being involved in work or work-related tasks. Second, it
also implies not thinking about job-related issues (Sonnentag & Fritz, 2007). Thus, psychological detachment from
work during nonwork time is a context-speciﬁc experience that may occur (or not) when one is away from the work
setting. Mentally disengaging and distancing oneself from work during work hours would not be covered by this
conceptualization of detachment. However, one may argue that psychological detachment can occur, for example,
during lunch breaks at work. Since research has not examined this idea in detail yet, our review only presents
ﬁndings regarding detachment outside the work setting.
Psychological detachment is mainly deﬁned as the absence of something (i.e., not thinking about one’s job during
nonwork time) and implies “letting go” of work-related thoughts and activities. Framed as the presence of something, psychological detachment can be described as the experience of being mentally involved in any other content
area (e.g., a hobby, one’s children’s school problems, or family activities). In some instances, psychological detachment might even manifest itself as a meditative state of thinking “nothing.”
A lack of psychological detachment overlaps with concepts such as repetitive thought, worry, or rumination.
Repetitive thought is a rather broad concept deﬁned as “the process of thinking attentively, repetitively, or frequently
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S75

about oneself and one’s world” (Segerstrom, Stanton, Alden, & Shortridge, 2003, p. 909). Repetitive thought can
take both adaptive and maladaptive forms. For example, worry refers to a chain of thoughts and images, “negatively
affect-laden and relatively uncontrollable” (Borkovec, Robinson, Pruzinsky, & DePree, 1983, p. 10), and is mainly
concerned with the future than with the present or the past (Borkovec et al., 1983). The term rumination subsumes “a
class of conscious thoughts that revolve around a common instrumental theme and that recur in the absence of
immediate environmental demands requiring the thoughts” (Martin & Tesser, 1996, p. 1) and occurs when experiencing discrepancies during goal pursuit. Rumination can be rather neutral—as used by Martin and Tesser—but it can also
have a negative connotation, particularly when it is “a mode of responding to distress that involves repetitively and
passively focusing on symptoms of distress and on the possible causes and consequences of these symptoms”
(Nolen-Hoeksema, Wisco, & Lyubomirsky, 2008, p. 400). Psychological detachment occurs in the absence of worry,
rumination, or other repetitive thoughts about work. However, it is important to note that psychological detachment is
not just the opposite of repetitive thoughts. Rather, psychological detachment refers to a speciﬁc content (or the absence
thereof) in a speciﬁc temporal context. Psychological detachment means to refrain from job-related thoughts during
nonwork time. Repetitive thoughts about, for instance, one’s health or family are compatible with psychologically
detaching from work. Similarly, repetitive thoughts about work while on the job do not contradict psychological detachment from work during nonwork time. Empirical evidence supports the view that psychological detachment is not just
the opposite of worry or rumination. For instance, Flaxman, Ménard, Bond, and Kinman (2012) reported a correlation of
r = .46 between psychological detachment and a combined measure of worry and rumination. Donahue et al. (2012)
reported a correlation of r = .49 between psychological detachment and rumination. These moderate correlations
suggest that there is some overlap between worry and rumination on the one hand and lack of detachment on the other
hand, but lack of detachment is not identical with worry or rumination.
Psychological detachment is also related to—albeit not identical to—engagement in leisure activities as well as to other
recovery experiences. For instance, psychological detachment is predicted by engagement in exercise activities
(Feuerhahn, Sonnentag, & Woll, 2014) or by absorption in joint activities with others (Hahn, Binnewies, & Haun,
2012). Importantly, while psychological detachment shows positive relationships with other recovery experiences such
as relaxation, mastery, and control (Ragsdale, Beehr, Grebner, & Han, 2011; Siltaloppi, Kinnunen, & Feldt, 2009;
Sonnentag & Fritz, 2007), it is a distinct construct and can be differentiated in conﬁrmatory factor analyses (Shimazu,
Sonnentag, Kubota, & Kawakami, 2012; Siltaloppi et al., 2009; Sonnentag, Binnewies, & Mojza, 2008; Sonnentag &
Fritz, 2007).

Within-person and between-person variation
Stressors, strain reactions, and well-being vary within individuals (e.g., on some days, more intense stressors are present
than on others) as well as between individuals (i.e., persons differ in the degree to which they face job stressors and
experience strain). Similarly, psychological detachment may vary between and within individuals. Thus, all these
constructs can be treated as within-person as well as between-person constructs. We will differentiate between
within-person and between-person studies when summarizing empirical research on the stressor-detachment model.

Overview: Stressor-detachment Model
Sonnentag (2010) proposed a stressor-detachment model that emphasizes the important role of psychological detachment in the stressor–strain process. This model draws on cognitive activation theory of stress (Meurs & Perrewé,
2011; Ursin & Eriksen, 2010) and the allostatic load model (Ganster & Rosen, 2013; McEwen, 1998) emphasizing that
it is not primarily the acute stress reaction that is detrimental for an organism but rather the sustained activation, even
when the stressor is no longer present. As Figure 1 illustrates, psychological detachment can be conceptualized as a
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S76

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

Figure 1. Basic stressor-detachment model

mediator and as a moderator in the stressor–strain process. Paths 1 and 2 show the mediating process; Path 4 shows the
moderating process. The mediator part of the stressor-detachment model proposes that job stressors impair psychological detachment, and in turn, poor psychological detachment directly inﬂuences an employee’s level of strain and wellbeing. Thus, low psychological detachment from work during nonwork time is seen as one mechanism that can explain
why job stressors lead to elevated strain levels. The moderator part of the model proposes that psychological detachment
inﬂuences the effects of job stressors on strain and poor well-being. More speciﬁcally, psychological detachment is
proposed to attenuate the impact of job stressors on strain.
Following a cybernetic approach to job stress (Edwards, 1992), Grifﬁn and Clarke (2011) suggested that shortterm dynamics operate within longer-term dynamics, with short-term processes being nested within longer-term
processes. Accordingly, we propose that psychological detachment from work can be described within different time
frames such as days, weeks, or years.
Short-term dynamics refer to processes unfolding within a workday. Job stressors encountered during work lead
to immediate strain reactions, including physiological and affective responses. For instance, when facing time
pressure or negative events at work, heart rate—as well as negative affective states such as anxiety or anger—will
increase (Ilies, Dimotakis, & de Pater, 2010; Rodell & Judge, 2009). These immediate reactions become evident brieﬂy
after the occurrence of the stressor while the employee is still at work. At the end of the workday, however, employee’s
physiological and psychological strain level still may be high (Ganster, Fox, & Dwyer, 2001; Ilies et al., 2010), often
reﬂected in high levels of negative activation (Ilies et al., 2007; Zohar, Tzischinski, & Epstein, 2003). This high level
of negative activation will make it more difﬁcult for the employee to detach from work during after-work hours because
it will stimulate the recall of negative events and experiences that occurred during the workday (cf., Bono, Glomb, Shen,
Kim, & Koch, 2013). Moreover, because the workday had been stressful, the employee might anticipate that the next
day will be stressful as well and might think about what can be done about the stressful situation. In addition, the
employee might even work in the evening to get more work done. Continuously thinking about work during nonwork
time and not detaching will keep the employee’s strain level elevated. This high strain level might even continue until
the next morning when the employee returns to work. If, however, the employee succeeds in detaching from work
during nonwork time, for instance, because he or she engages in a highly absorbing leisure activity (Hahn et al., 2012),
the stressors experienced during the day will lose their impact on employee strain. Psychological detachment from work
during evening hours will attenuate the effects of job stressors on subsequent strain levels.
Of course, psychological detachment from work will not only be inﬂuenced by job stressors but also other factors
such as family events or leisure time experiences. In addition, job stressors might not always impair psychological
detachment. For instance, when job stressors are not appraised as relevant for one’s goals or well-being or when they
are overcome immediately through successful coping processes (cf. Lazarus & Folkman, 1984), they lose their
relevance for the individual and may not hamper detachment from work during nonwork time. We will discuss
the inﬂuence of nonwork experiences and the role of moderators on the association between job stressors and lack
of detachment later in this paper.
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S77

A somewhat longer-term cycle occurs at the week level. For most people, weekends—or other periods of one to
three full days off work—provide more free time than workday evenings and therefore offer more opportunities
for psychological detachment. Even when an employee does not fully detach during evening hours throughout
the workweek, he or she might detach from work during one or more days off. This increased opportunity for
detachment might be partly due to the larger amount of time that is available to unwind and recover. In addition,
during off-work days, many people pursue other activities than during weekday evenings which by themselves
may foster psychological detachment. Thus, in an optimal situation, an employee will detach from work during
the nonwork days so that physiological strain levels and negative affective states are reduced and well-being
increases. The more an employee detaches from work during the nonwork days, the more likely it is that job
stressors experienced during the workweek lose their impact on employees’ strain levels.
However, there might be nonwork days on which employees do not fully detach from work. The stressor-detachment
model suggests that this will be the case when the preceding week was particularly stressful. In such a situation, employees
will still be experiencing negative activation that makes detachment difﬁcult, and they may have encountered severe
hassles, negative social interactions, or moments when they felt overwhelmed so that they need some cognitive processing
of the stressful experience in order to recover (Watkins, 2008). In addition, full detachment might be hampered when an
employee often thinks about the upcoming workweek or when engaging in job-related activities during the nonwork days.
Over the course of a year, people will go through numerous cycles of stressor exposure and subsequent (partial)
detachment, both at the day and week levels. Under optimal circumstances, sufﬁcient detachment will occur during
the evening or when having a few days off so that strain reactions that occurred during the day or that might have
accumulated during the week (cf., McEwen, 1998; Theorell & Karasek, 1996) will be substantially reduced and will
not build up over time. If, however, no sufﬁcient detachment during the evenings and during off-work days occurs,
strain levels will remain elevated and over time strain will build up and well-being will decrease.
If an employee tends not to detach from work over several weekday evenings or a few days off, this tendency of
not detaching may develop into a habit (Ouellette & Wood, 1998) and may become the employee’s usual way of
spending evenings and weekends. This employee’s overall level of psychological detachment will differ from that
of an employee who successfully detaches from work during evenings or days off and who has developed leisure
routines that help in detaching. Encountering job stressors day after day will reduce the likelihood of detachment
so that over time, the lack of detachment turns into a chronic state. As a result, strain levels will remain chronically
elevated. If this person, however, succeeds in detaching from work during evenings and off-work days despite high
levels of stressors, strain levels will be relatively low and will not increase substantially over time.
Vacations are another time period during which employees’ strain level may decrease. Spending a week or more
off the job—often in a different environment—helps to break the vicious cycle between job stressors, lack of detachment, and strain (Westman & Eden, 1997). Accordingly, research reveals that strain is reduced and well-being
increases after a vacation but returns to pre-vacation levels over time (Kühnel & Sonnentag, 2011).
In the following sections, we summarize the empirical evidence for the stressor-detachment model. We start with Path
2 (lack of psychological detachment as a predictor of strain and poor well-being) to emphasize the important role of
psychological detachment for employee well-being. Then we will move to Path 1 (stressors as a predictor of poor
detachment), before we address mediator and moderator effects. Finally, we will discuss how the stressor-detachment
model may be extended.

Poor Psychological Detachment as a Predictor of Strain and Impaired
Well-being
The stressor-detachment model proposes that poor psychological detachment from work during nonwork time
predicts strain symptoms and poor well-being. During the past decade, researchers have tested this assumption in
both between-person and within-person studies. Tables 1 and 2 summarize the relevant studies.
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S78

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

Table 1. Between-person studies examining detachment as a predictor of strain and well-being.
Authors

Sample, design, and analyses

Measure of strain and
well-being

Main ﬁndings

Burke, Koyuncu,
and Fiksenbaum
(2009)

N = 650 managers (Turkey)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, work-situation
variables

Exhaustion
Psychosomatic symptoms
Life satisfaction

Psychological detachment did
not predict strain

Cheng and
McCarthy (2013)

N = 178 persons with work and
school responsibilities (Canada)
Two measurement points
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, coping

Work satisfaction
Family satisfaction
School satisfaction

Psychological detachment
(overall measure for all
responsibilities) did not predict
satisfaction measures;
psychological detachment
moderated the negative
relationship between workplace
conﬂict and work satisfaction when
cognitive avoidance was low

Davidson et al.
(2010)

N = 248 faculty members (Israel,
New Zealand, USA)
Longitudinal
ANCOVA

Burnout
Positive affect
Life satisfaction

Faculty members who detached
more during the sabbatical
showed less burnout and more
positive affect and life
satisfaction during and after the
sabbatical

de Bloom, Geurts,
and Kompier (2012)

N = 67 employees on short
vacations (The Netherlands)
Longitudinal
Pre-measure: two weeks before
vacation, post-measures: 1 to
10 days after vacation
Partial correlations
Control variables: demographic
variables, health and well-being
before vacation

Eight indicators of health and
well-being

Detachment during vacation
predicted increase in health and
well-being after vacation

de Bloom, Geurts,
and Kompier (2013)

N = 54 employees on vacations
(The Netherlands)
Longitudinal
Pre-measure: two weeks before
vacation, post-measures: one to
four weeks after vacation
Partial correlations
Control variables: demographic
variables, health and well-being
before vacation

Six indicators of health and
well-being

Detachment during vacation did
not predict change in health and
well-being after vacation

de Jonge, Spoor,
Sonnentag,
Dormann, and van
den Tooren (2012)

N = 399 service workers
(The Netherlands)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, job demands and job
resources

Emotional exhaustion
Physical health complaints;
Detachment measure
differentiated between
cognitive, emotional, and
physical detachment

Emotional detachment predicted
low emotional exhaustion, but
not physical health complaints;
physical detachment predicted
low emotional exhaustion and
low physical health complaints;
cognitive detachment predicted
(Continues)

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S79

Table 1. (Continued)
Authors

Sample, design, and analyses

Measure of strain and
well-being

Main ﬁndings
neither emotional exhaustion nor
physical health complaints

Donahue et al.
(2012)
Etzion et al. (1998)

N = 118 nurses (Canada)
Cross-sectional
Correlation
N = 81 reservists during military
service (Israel)
Longitudinal; time lag: four
weeks and more (pre-measure:
two weeks before respite,
post-measure: one week
after respite)
Control variables: pre-respite
burnout level, job stressors,
quality of respite experience

Emotional exhaustion

Detachment negatively correlated
with emotional exhaustion

Burnout

Detachment did not predict postrespite burnout; three-way
interaction effect between
detachment during respite, job
stressors, and quality of respite
experience

Flaxman et al.
(2012)

N = 77 academic employees (UK)
Short-term longitudinal study;
time lag: one and two weeks after
break, and four and ﬁve weeks
after break; detachment assessed
during the Easter bank holiday
weekend (Time 2)
OLS regression
Control variables: age, job type,
respite length, hours worked
during break, well-being before
break

Emotional exhaustion
Anxiety
Fatigue

Detachment showed signiﬁcant
negative concurrent and lagged
correlations with emotional
exhaustion, anxiety, and fatigue
but did not predict change in
these outcomes over time

Fritz et al. (2010)

N = 229 preschool teachers
(Germany)
Short-term longitudinal (time lag:
ﬁve days for lagged analysis)
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, working time, hassles
during weekend, other recovery
experiences (mastery, relaxation,
control), pre-weekend affect

PANAS-X

Detachment concurrently related
to joviality and serenity
Detachment predicted increase in
serenity
Detachment did not predict other
affective states

Joviality
Self-assurance
Serenity
Fear
Hostility
Sadness
Fatigue
At end of weekend and at end
of following week

Fritz, Yankelevich,
Zarubin, and
Barger (2010)

N = 107 university employees
(USA)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, negative affect,
workload, autonomy

Emotional exhaustion
Life satisfaction
Assessed by signiﬁcant other or
close friend

Detachment predicted low
emotional exhaustion and high
life satisfaction

Hahn et al. (2012)

N = 269 (Germany)

Vigor, joviality, serenity,
negative activation, fatigue

Detachment during the weekend
predicted low negative activation
(Continues)

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S80

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

Table 1. (Continued)
Authors

Sample, design, and analyses

Measure of strain and
well-being

Main ﬁndings

Short-term longitudinal
(time lag: several days)
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, activities, other
recovery experiences, and
baseline scores of the
outcome variables

and low fatigue; detachment did
not predict vigor, joviality or
serenity in regression analysis,
but positive correlations

Hahn, Binnewies,
Sonnentag, and
Mojza (2011)

N = 95 (Germany)
Intervention study
Correlations

Emotional exhaustion
State negative affect
Sleep quality

Detachment was negatively
related to emotional exhaustion
and state negative affect, and
positively to sleep quality

Hahn and Dormann
(2013)

N = 228 managers and working
partners (USA)
Concurrent analysis
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables

Life satisfaction

Own detachment and partner’s
detachment predicted life
satisfaction

Kühnel, Sonnentag,
and Westman
(2009)

N = 156 nurses (Germany and
Switzerland)
Concurrent analysis
Structural equation modeling
Control variables: work
engagement before the respite

Work engagement

Detachment during a short respite
was positively related to an
increase in work engagement
from before to after the respite

Moreno-Jiménez,
Mayo, et al. (2009)

N = 128 emergency professionals
(Spain)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, numbers of hours
worked, work-family-conﬂict,
family-work conﬂict

Psychological strain (GHQ)
Life satisfaction

Detachment predicted low
psychological strain and high life
satisfaction; detachment
attenuated the effect of workfamily conﬂict on psychological
strain and the effect of familywork conﬂict on life satisfaction

Moreno-Jiménez,
Rodrígez-Munoz,
Pastor, SanzVergel, and Garrosa
(2009)

N = 511 employees of
telecommunications companies
(Spain)
Predictors and outcome variables
assessed at two points in time;
time lag: 1 month
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, negative affectivity

Psychological strain (GHQ)

Detachment did not predict
psychological strain, but
attenuated the effect of
workplace bullying on
psychological strain

Moreno-Jiménez,
Rodrígez-Munoz,
Sanz-Vergel, and
Garrosa (2012)

N = 990 persons (Spain)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic

Somatic symptoms
Anxiety

Detachment negatively
related to somatic symptoms
and anxiety
Detachment attenuated the
association between role conﬂict
(Continues)

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S81

Table 1. (Continued)
Authors

Sample, design, and analyses

Measure of strain and
well-being

Main ﬁndings

variables, role conﬂict, other
recovery experiences

and anxiety, but not the
association between role conﬂict
and somatic symptoms

Querstret and
Cropley (2012)

N = 719 working adults (UK)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: gender,
negative affect, job demands, job
control, recovery opportunities,
affective rumination, problemsolving pondering

Acute fatigue (“After a typical
work period, I have little
energy left.”)
Chronic fatigue (“I often dread
waking up to another day of
my work”)

Detachment predicted acute,
but not chronic fatigue

Safstrom and Hartig
(2013)

N = 174 full-time employees,
enrolled as students (Sweden)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, study demands, job
demands

Perceived stress
Life satisfaction

Detachment predicted low levels
of perceived stress and high
levels of life satisfaction
No moderator effect of
detachment

Sanz-Vergel et al.
(2010)

N = 941 professionals from the
security sector (Spain)
Cross-sectional
Correlations
N = 2520 (Japan)
Cross-sectional
Correlations

Physical symptoms
Anxiety
Depression
Negative affect
Psychological distress
Physical complaints
Work engagement

Detachment negatively correlated
with physical symptoms, anxiety,
depression, and negative affect

Siltaloppi et al.
(2009)

N = 527 employees (Finland)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, job stressors, job
control, and other recovery
experiences

Emotional exhaustion
Need for recovery
Work engagement

Detachment predicted low
emotional exhaustion, low need
for recovery, and high work
engagement

Sonnentag,
Binnewies, et al.
(2010)

N = 309 non-for proﬁt employees
(Germany, Switzerland)
Longitudinal (time lag:
12 months)
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, negative affectivity,
job stressors, job control, and
baseline level of exhaustion

Exhaustion, psychosomatic
complaints, work engagement

Detachment predicted low
emotional exhaustion and
attenuated the relationship
between high job demands and
low psychosomatic complaints
and work engagement

Sonnentag and Fritz
(2007)

N = 137 (Germany)
Cross-sectional
Correlations

Health complaints (GHQ)
Burnout
Depressive symptoms
Need for recovery

Detachment negatively related to
health complaints, burnout,
depressive symptoms, need for

Shimazu et al.
(2012)

Detachment negatively correlated
with psychological distress,
physical complaints, and work
engagement

(Continues)

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S82

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

Table 1. (Continued)
Authors

Sample, design, and analyses

Measure of strain and
well-being

Main ﬁndings

Life satisfaction
Sleep problems

recovery, sleep problems, and
positively to life satisfaction

Sonnentag, Kuttler,
and Fritz (2010)

N = 136 pastors (Switzerland)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, job stressors and job
control

Exhaustion
Need for recovery
Detachment assessed by self
and spouse reports

Detachment predicted low
emotional exhaustion and low
need for recovery

Sonnentag, Unger,
and Nägel (2013)

N = 291 employees (Germany)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, job stressors, job
control, and social conﬂicts

Health complaints
(GHQ)

Detachment predicted low level
of health complaints and
attenuated the relationship
between relationship conﬂicts
and health complaints

von Thiele Schwarz
(2011)

N = 160 working women
(Sweden)
Longitudinal (time lag: 6 months)
OLS regression
Control variables: occupation,
children at home, job demands
and job control (initial level of
fatigue and next-day recovery not
controlled)

Fatigue
Next-day recovery (i.e., feeling
refreshed at the start of the
workday)

Inability to withdraw from work
predicted fatigue and poor nextday recovery 6 months later

Between-person studies
Research using between-person designs has examined a broad range of nonwork settings during which psychological detachment from work might occur, including nonwork time during evenings (ten Brummelhuis & Bakker,
2012; Sonnentag et al., 2008), weekends (Fritz, Sonnentag, et al., 2010; Hahn et al., 2012), vacations (de Bloom
et al., 2012), sabbaticals (Davidson et al., 2010), and even military service (Etzion et al., 1998). While most of these
studies assessed psychological detachment with the measure developed by Sonnentag and Fritz (2007), other
measures were used as well (e.g., Querstret & Cropley, 2012; von Thiele Schwarz, 2011). While many studies were
cross-sectional in nature, some used longitudinal designs. In these longitudinal studies, time lags varied substantially, ranging from a few days (Hahn et al., 2012) to 12 months (Sonnentag, Binnewies, et al., 2010). In addition
to separating measurement of predictor and outcome variables over time, several studies tried to reduce common
method bias by assessing either psychological detachment (Sonnentag, Kuttler, et al., 2010) or strain reactions
(Fritz, Yankelevich et al., 2010) using signiﬁcant-other reports.
In summary, most studies reported negative relationships between psychological detachment from work
during nonwork time and strain indicators such as emotional exhaustion, need for recovery, and health
complaints (e.g., Donahue et al., 2012; Sanz-Vergel et al., 2010; Sonnentag & Fritz, 2007). After controlling
for potentially confounding variables (e.g., demographic variables, work-situation variables, and negative
affectivity), psychological detachment was still negatively related to strain indicators in many studies (e.g.,
Fritz et al., 2010; Moreno-Jiménez, Mayo, et al., 2009; Siltaloppi et al., 2009), albeit not in all (de Bloom
et al., 2013; Flaxman et al., 2012). Several studies found signiﬁcant results for some strain indicators, but
not for others (de Jonge et al., 2012; Querstret & Cropley, 2012). In some of the analyses, lack of detachment
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S83

Table 2. Within-person studies examining detachment as a predictor of strain and well-being.
Authors

Sample, design, and analysis

Measure of strain and
well-being

Main ﬁndings

Demerouti,
Bakker,
Sonnentag, and
Fullagar (2012)

N = 83 employees (Germany, The
Netherlands), 332 days
Within-person analysis, person-mean
centering of day-level predictor
variables
Control variables: demographic
variables general level of outcome
variables, ﬂow at work

Exhaustion at bedtime,
vigor at bedtime

Detachment during the evening
predicted low levels of exhaustion
and high levels of vigor at bedtime

Derks and Bakker
(in press)

N = 69 employees (The Netherlands),
293 days
Within-person analysis, person-mean
centering of day-level predictor
variables

Work home interference,
emotional exhaustion,
cynicism

Detachment after work negatively
related to work-home interference,
particularly in intensive smartphone
users; work-home interference in turn
related to elevated levels of
emotional exhaustion (but not
cynicism), also only in intensive
smartphone users

Feuerhahn et al.
(2014)

N = 126 persons (Germany),
580 days
Within-person analysis, person-mean
centering of day-level predictor
variables

Positive affect and
negative affect at
bedtime

Detachment during the evening
predicted high positive affect and low
negative affect at bedtime

Korunka,
Kubicek, Prem,
and Cvitan (2012)

N = 64 railway controllers (Central
Europe), 626 days
Within-person analysis, grand-mean
centering of day-level variables
Control variables: demographic
variables, fatigue at shift onset,
workload, time control during shift

Fatigue during night
shift and day shift

Detachment prior to shift predicted
low levels of fatigue 4 hours after
start of night shift and after 12 hours
of day shift, but not at other time
intervals; detachment attenuated the
effect of high workload on fatigue
during the ﬁrst 4 hours of a night
shift, but not at other time intervals

Mojza,
Sonnentag, and
Bornemann
(2011)

N = 105 employees working as
volunteers (Germany), 476 days
Within-person analysis, person-mean
centering of day-level predictor
variables
Control variables: demographic
variables, day-speciﬁc job stressors,
leisure activities on the preceding
evening, need satisfaction, mastery
during the evening

Positive and negative
affect at work on the
next day

Detachment during the evening did
not predict positive and negative
affect at work on the next day

Sanz-Vergel,
Demerouti,
Bakker, and
Moreno-Jiménez
(2011)

N = 49 employees (Spain), 5 days
over one week
Within-person analysis, person-mean
centering of day-level predictor
variables
Control variables: demographic
variables, home-role salience,

Work-home interference
in the evening, cognitive
liveliness at bedtime

Detachment during the evening
predicted low levels of work-home
interference, but not cognitive
liveliness

(Continues)

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S84

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

Table 2. (Continued)
Authors

Sample, design, and analysis

Measure of strain and
well-being

Main ﬁndings

morning vitality, general level of
outcome variable
Sonnentag and
Bayer (2005)

N = 87 employees and free-lancers
(Germany), 221 days
Detachment assessed for each
activity
Within-person analysis, person-mean
centering of day-level predictor
variables
Control variables: demographic
variables, day-speciﬁc time pressure
and work hours, mood and fatigue
after work, activities

Positive mood at
bedtime, fatigue at
bedtime

Detachment during the evening
predicted positive mood and low
fatigue; effect of detachment on low
fatigue was particularly strong after
days with high time pressure

Sonnentag and
Binnewies (2013)

N = 96 health care professionals
(Germany and Switzerland),
N = 289 days
Within-person analysis, person-mean
centering of day-level predictor
variables
Control variables: general level of
affect, weekday

Negative state affect,
positive state affect,
both at bedtime and in
the next morning

Detachment during the evening
predicted low negative affect at
bedtime, but not in the next morning;
no relationship between detachment
and positive affect; detachment
attenuated the effect of negative
affect at work on negative affect at
bedtime and in the next morning;
detachment attenuated the effect of
positive affect at work on positive
affect at bedtime (but not in the next
morning)

Sonnentag et al.
(2008)

N = 166 public-service employees
(Germany and Switzerland), 441 days
Within-person analysis, person-mean
centering of day-level predictor
variables
Control variables: demographic
variables, general level of affect
sleep, other recovery experiences

Negative state affect,
fatigue, positive state
affect, serenity in the
morning

Detachment in the evening predicted
low morning negative affect and low
morning fatigue, but not positive
affect or serenity

Sonnentag,
Mojza,
Binnewies, and
Scholl (2008)

N = 159 employees (Germany),
432 weeks
Week-level study with within-person
analysis, person-mean centering of
week-level predictor variables
Control variables: demographic
variables, positive affect on Monday,
time pressure, weekend anticipation

Positive affect on Friday
afternoon

Detachment during the week
predicted positive affect on Friday;
effect particularly strong for highly
engaged employees

Volman, Bakker,
and
Xanthopoulou
(2013)

N = 65 employees (The Netherlands),
325 days
Within-person analysis, person-mean
centering of day-level predictor
variables

State of being recovered
in the morning

Detachment during the evening
predicted state of being recovered
in the morning

(Continues)

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S85

Table 2. (Continued)
Authors

Sample, design, and analysis

Measure of strain and
well-being

Main ﬁndings

Control variables: family status,
general well-being, self-family
facilitation
ten Brummelhuis
and Bakker
(2012)

N = 74 nurses (The Netherlands),
282 days
Within-person analysis, person-mean
centering of day-level predictor
variables
Control variables: demographic
variable, general level of work
engagement, previous level of
exhaustion, off-job activities,
relaxation during off-job time

Vigor (part of contextfree engagement
measure) in the morning

Detachment during the evening
predicted morning vigor, above
and beyond relaxation and activities
as predictors

predicted strain indicators only under speciﬁc circumstances (Moreno-Jiménez, Rodrígez-Munoz, et al., 2009;
Sonnentag, Binnewies, et al., 2010).
Importantly, negative relationships between psychological detachment and strain indicators were observed not
only in cross-sectional but also in longitudinal studies. For instance, Sonnentag, Binnewies, et al. (2010) found that
lack of psychological detachment from work during nonwork time predicted an increase in emotional exhaustion
over the course of one year. Hahn et al. (2012) reported an increase in negative affective states over a weekend when
psychological detachment from work during the weekend was low.
Findings regarding well-being indicators seem less consistent. Speciﬁcally, while psychological detachment was
positively related to work engagement in some research (Kühnel et al., 2009; Siltaloppi et al., 2009), a study by
Shimazu et al. (2012) reported a negative correlation in a Japanese sample. Some studies found positive relationships
between psychological detachment and life satisfaction (Davidson et al., 2010; Fritz et al., 2010; Moreno-Jiménez,
Mayo, et al., 2009), while in Hahn et al.’s (2012) weekend study, psychological detachment was unrelated to vigor,
joviality, and serenity. One may speculate that psychological detachment is more important for an overall positive
assessment of one’s life than for speciﬁc momentary positive affective states.
Overall, between-person studies so far suggest that low levels of psychological detachment are related to
increased strain and decreased well-being, even when using longitudinal designs and when including spouse or peer
reports of key study variables. However, some studies failed to ﬁnd signiﬁcant relationships. Several factors might
have contributed to these inconsistent results. First, detachment seems to show differential patterns with various outcome variables. Whereas ﬁndings are relatively consistent for strain indicators (e.g., exhaustion), as well as for work
engagement and life satisfaction, they are less uniform for positive affective states, particularly when measuring
short-term changes (Fritz, Sonnentag, et al., 2010; Hahn et al., 2012). It might be that these positive affective states
are more strongly inﬂuenced by positive events that happened immediately before the assessment of the affective
state, rather than by a lack of detachment several days ago. Second, ﬁndings become less consistent when taking
worrying and rumination into account (Flaxman et al., 2012; Querstret & Cropley, 2012), suggesting that a lack
of detachment often goes hand in hand with worrying and rumination, which in turn accounts for the detrimental
effects. This interpretation is in line with other studies reporting that positively reﬂecting about one’s work is associated with a decrease in exhaustion and an improvement of positive affective states (Fritz & Sonnentag, 2005;
Sonnentag & Grant, 2012). Thus, it might be that especially negative thoughts about work contribute to the
detrimental effects of poor detachment. Third, the lack of signiﬁcant results in some instances suggests that poor
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S86

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

detachment might be only detrimental under certain circumstances, for instance when work is particularly stressful
and a predominantly negative experience (Moreno-Jiménez, Rodrígez-Munoz, et al., 2009; Sonnentag, Binnewies,
et al., 2010). We will discuss such moderator effects later in this review. Fourth, it is always imperative to examine if
inconsistent ﬁndings might be caused by methodological factors. Research evidence so far, however, suggests that
methodological factors play a minor role when explaining the overall pattern of results: psychological detachment
was related to strain indicators not only when using relatively weak research designs (cross-sectional designs and
all variables assessed through self-reports) but also when using stronger methodological approaches (longitudinal
designs and reports by others; e.g., Fritz et al., 2010; Hahn, et al., 2012). One factor that might play a role is the time
lag used in studies that examine detachment during a speciﬁc respite period. The effects of poor detachment during a
few days off might be relatively short-lived because they are overshadowed by subsequence work and nonwork
periods. Chronic levels of poor detachment, however, may have longer-term effects (Sonnentag, Binnewies et al.,
2010). With the exception of the study by Shimazu et al. (2012), lack of detachment had no main effect on positive outcomes in any study so far. We will discuss the possibility that lack of detachment might be positive later in this paper.

Within-person studies
Within-person studies focused on within-person day-to-day ﬂuctuations in detachment and associations with daylevel affect and strain. The core question addressed in this research is whether an individual’s affective state and level
of strain on days high in detachment differs from those on days low in detachment. Studies examined a variety of time
lags between detachment and affect or strain (Table 2). Speciﬁcally, studies examined how detachment during evening
hours relates to affect and strain at bedtime (Demerouti et al., 2012; Feuerhahn et al., 2014; Sonnentag & Bayer, 2005),
the following morning (ten Brummelhuis & Bakker, 2012; Sonnentag et al., 2008), and during work the following day
(Korunka et al., 2012; Mojza et al., 2011).
Most within-person studies focused on rather immediate beneﬁts of detachment by examining detachment during
evening hours as a predictor of affect and strain at bedtime. With very few exceptions (e.g., Sanz-Vergel et al.,
2011), detachment during the evening was a signiﬁcant predictor of state affect and strain at bedtime (Demerouti
et al., 2012; Feuerhahn et al., 2014; Sonnentag & Bayer, 2005). The more employees detached from their work
during the evening, the better they felt at bedtime: they reported lower levels of negative affect, exhaustion, and
fatigue and higher levels of positive affect and vigor.
Studies examining the potential beneﬁts of detachment in the evening on morning affect and strain found a
similar—albeit less consistent—pattern. Detaching from work in the evening predicted low levels of negative
affect as well as low levels of fatigue (Sonnentag et al., 2008), high levels of vigor (ten Brummelhuis &
Bakker, 2012), and feelings of recovery (Volman et al., 2013) the following morning. However, not all studies
reported signiﬁcant results (Sonnentag & Binnewies, 2013) or failed to ﬁnd effects on positive affective states
(Sonnentag et al., 2008).
So far, few studies looked at the potential effects of detachment on states during the following work period.
ten Brummelhuis and Bakker (2012) found that detachment during the evening predicted high work engagement during the following day. Korunka et al. (2012) reported negative relationships between between-shift
detachment and fatigue during the following shift for some measurement intervals, but not for all. Mojza
et al. (2011) found no evidence for evening detachment predicting positive or negative affect during work
the following day.
Overall, evidence from within-person studies suggests that the immediate gains that result from detachment are
stronger than gains occurring later in time. Beneﬁts until the next morning were observed in several studies, even
when controlling for indicators of restorative sleep (Sonnentag, Binnewies, et al., 2008). However, it seems that beneﬁts of detachment rarely persist after people go back to work (Korunka et al., 2012; Mojza et al., 2011). Probably,
job demands and events unfolding at work have a strong immediate impact on state affect and strain (Gross et al.,
2011; Rodell & Judge, 2009), thereby largely overriding the effects of detachment. However, a study by Sonnentag,
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S87

Mojza, et al. (2008) suggests that the beneﬁts of regularly detaching from work during after-work hours may accumulate over the workweek: In this study using a week-level design, psychological detachment during evenings predicted positive affect at the end of the workweek. Taken together, within-person studies suggest that employees’
affective states beneﬁt from detaching from work during the evening. Obviously, the immediate gains are stronger
than delayed gains. In addition, preliminary evidence suggests that the effects of poor detachment may accumulate
over the course of a workweek.

Stressors as Predictors of Poor Psychological Detachment
As mentioned above, the stressor-detachment model suggests that job stressors can hinder psychological detachment
from work during nonwork time. More speciﬁcally, job stressors are associated with an increase in negative activation such as negative affect (Volmer, Binnewies, Sonnentag, & Niessen, 2012), increase in stress hormones
(Sonnentag & Fritz, 2006), or worry and rumination about the stressor (Cropley & Purvis, 2003). Negative
activation in turn makes it difﬁcult for employees to mentally disengage from work even after they physically leave
the workplace. Speciﬁcally, they may stay occupied with work-related tasks, try to engage in problem solving and to
deal with the stressor, or continue to worry or vent about the stressor. Accordingly, research shows that a variety of
job stressors is associated with lower psychological detachment from work. Below, we will describe empirical
ﬁndings relating to job stressors and detachment, again differentiating them into between-person and within-person
studies (see also Tables 3 and 4).

Between-person studies
Most between-person studies so far have focused on workload and other job demands as a predictor of low psychological detachment using cross-sectional research designs. Several studies show a negative relationship between
time pressure or workload on the one hand and psychological detachment on the other hand (e.g., Burke et al.,
2009; Potok & Littman-Ovadia, 2014; Safstrom & Hartig, 2013; Shimazu et al., 2012; Sonnentag & Fritz, 2007).
Similarly, studies found negative relationships between number of work hours or hours of overtime and psychological detachment (e.g., Burke et al., 2009; Kinnunen et al., 2011; Oosthuizen et al., 2011). Additionally, decisionmaking demands and other cognitive demands (similar to job complexity) have been found to be associated with
a lack of psychological detachment (Kinnunen et al., 2011; Oosthuizen et al., 2011).
Researchers have further examined relationships between a variety of other jobs stressors and psychological
detachment. Examining between-person relationships, research revealed negative relationships for situational
constraints (Sonnentag & Fritz, 2007), emotional dissonance (i.e. displaying emotions other than the ones one
actually feels; Sonnentag, Kuttler, et al., 2010), and emotional demands (Oosthuizen et al., 2011). Sonnentag
and Fritz (2007) further found that role ambiguity—a lack of clear role assignments—was negatively associated
with psychological detachment from work during nonwork time. Potok and Littman-Ovadia (2014) found negative
relationships between role ambiguity and psychological detachment when using signiﬁcant-other reports but not when
using self-reports of detachment. In addition, they found negative relationships between role conﬂict—the incompatibility of different work roles—and psychological detachment from work (cf. Moreno-Jiménez et al., 2012, for a
similar ﬁnding). However, Sonnentag and Kruel (2006) found no relationship between either role ambiguity or role
conﬂict and psychological detachment. So far, only a few between-person studies have explored the role of social
stressors in psychological detachment from work. For instance, Demsky et al. (in press) found that (co-worker and
self-reports of) workplace aggression was negatively associated with employee-reported detachment.
Research on psychological detachment from work has further started exploring the impact of work-related activities during nonwork time. For example, Park et al. (2011) found that the amount of work-related technology use at
home (i.e., email or phone)—possibly resulting from high workload—was associated with lower levels of
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S88

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

Table 3. Between-person studies examining stressors as predictors of detachment.
Authors

Sample, design, and analyses

Measure of stressors

Main ﬁndings

Barber and
Jenkins
(in press)

N = 315 workers (>30 hours per
week; USA)
Cross-sectional
Moderated mediation
Control variables: work-to-home
segmentation, workload, age

Information and
Communication
Technology (ICT)
Boundary crossing

Boundary crossing was negatively
associated with psychological
detachment; this relationship was
attenuated by boundary creation

Burke et al.
(2009)

N = 650 managers (Turkey)
Cross-sectional
Correlations
Control variables: Demographics,
work-situation variables

Work hours
Work intensity

Hours worked and work intensity
had low, negative associations with
detachment

Cropley and
Purvis (2003)

N = 94 teachers (UK)
Diary study during one workday
evening, hourly intervals
ANOVA
Control variables: demographic
variables, occupational grade,
teaching experience, number of hours
worked at home

High work demands
and low job control
(= high strain group)

High strain group reported higher
levels of ruminative thought in
the evening

Demsky, Ellis,
and Fritz
(in press)

N = 107 college and university
employees (USA)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: Age, gender,
marital status, living with children

Workplace aggression
self- and coworker
reports

Workplace aggression was
negatively associated
with detachment

Kinnunen and
Feldt (2013)

N = 274 employees from various jobs
(Finland), subsample of Kinnunen
et al. (2011)
Longitudinal; time lag: 1 year
Structural equation modeling

Time pressure
Demands in decision
making
Weekly working hours

Time pressure, demand in decision
making, and weekly working hours
at Time 1 were negatively associated
with detachment at Time 2
Detachment at Time 1 was negatively
associated with the stressors at Time 2

Kinnunen,
Feldt,
Siltaloppi, and
Sonnentag
(2011)

N = 527 employees from various
jobs (Finland)

Oosthuizen,
Mostert, and
Koekemoer
(2011)
Park, Fritz, and
Jex (2011)

Time pressure
Demands in decisionmaking
Weekly working hours

Job demands (time pressures, demands in
decision making, weekly working hours)
were associated with lower detachment
Detachment mediated the relationships
between job demands and fatigue

N = 366 university employees
(South Africa)
Cross-sectional
Correlations

Work pressure
Emotional demands
Cognitive demands

Work pressure, emotional demands, and
cognitive demands were negatively
associated with detachment

N = 269 university alumni (USA)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: demographics,
job involvement

Work-related
technology use at
home

Technology use was associated
with lower detachment

Cross-sectional
Structural equation modeling

(Continues)
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S89

Table 3. (Continued)
Authors

Sample, design, and analyses

Measure of stressors

Main ﬁndings

Potok and
Littman-Ovadia
(2014)

N = 210 employees from various
occupations and 109 signiﬁcant
others (Israel)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: work hours

Role ambiguity
Role conﬂict
Workload

Role ambiguity was associated with
signiﬁcant-other-reported detachment,
but was not associated with self-reported
detachment. Role conﬂict and workload
were associated with detachment

Safstrom and
Hartig (2013)

N = 174 full-time employees, enrolled
as students (Sweden)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression
Control variables: demographic
variables, study demands

Job demands

High job demands predicted low levels
of detachment
Detachment mediated relationships
between 1) job demands and perceived
stress, and 2) job demands and life
satisfaction

Shimazu et al.
(2012)

N = 2,520 (Japan)
Cross-sectional
Correlations

Job demands

Job demands were negatively
associated with detachment

Sonnentag and
Fritz (2007)

N = 271 employees from various
occupations (Germany)
Cross-sectional
Correlations

Time pressure
Role ambiguity
Situational constraints
Hours of overtime

Time pressure, role ambiguity,
situational constraints, and hours of
overtime were negatively associated
with detachment

Sonnentag and
Kruel (2006)

N = 148 school teachers (Germany)
Detachment assessed with self-report
measure and by family member
Cross-sectional
OLS
Control variables: demographics,
action-state orientation, teaching load

Workload
Role ambiguity
Role conﬂict

Workload was associated with lower
self-reported and family-reported
detachment

Sonnentag,
Kuttler, et al.
(2010)

N = 136 pastors and 97 spouses
(Switzerland)
Cross-sectional
OLS regression, dyadic-data analysis
Control variables: demographics,
actual work hours, job control

Workload
Emotional dissonance

Workload and emotional dissonance
were related to low detachment
Self-reported detachment was a partial
mediator between 1) workload/emotional
dissonance and emotional exhaustion,
and 2) workload/emotional dissonance
and need for recovery
Spouse-reported detachment was a
partial mediator between 1) workload
and emotional exhaustion, and 2)
workload and need for recovery

von Thiele
Schwarz (2011)

N = 160 working women (Sweden)
Longitudinal; time lag: 6 months
OLS regression
Control variables: demographics

Job demands

Job demands (Time 1)predicted inability
to withdraw from work (Time 1);
inability to withdraw partially mediated
the relationship between 1) job demands
and poor next-day recovery (Time 2)
and 2) job demands and fatigue (Time 2).

detachment. In addition, their ﬁndings show that a strong workgroup norm for segmenting work and nonwork
domains was associated with higher levels of detachment during nonwork time. Furthermore, a recent study
by Barber and Jenkins (in press) found that information and communication technology (ICT) boundary crossing
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S90

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

Table 4. Within-person studies examining stressors as predictors of detachment.
Authors

Sample, design, and analyses

Measure of
stressors

Main ﬁndings

Bono et al.
(2013)

N = 61 women working in outpatient
family practice clinics (USA), 915 days
Within-person analysis, person-mean
centering of momentary and workday
predictor variables

Negative events
(during the
workday)

Negative events during the
workday predicted lower
detachment during
evening hours

Sonnentag and
Bayer (2005)*

N = 87 employees from various occupations
(Germany), 221 days
Within-person analysis, person-mean centering
of day-level predictor variables
Control variables: demographics, action-state
orientation, off-job activities

Chronic and daylevel workload
(time pressure,
hours of work)

High chronic time pressure and
long daily work hours predicted
lower detachment during
evening hours

ten
Brummelhuis
and Bakker
(2012)

N = 74 nurses (The Netherlands),
282 days
Within-person analysis, person-mean
centering of day-level predictor variables
Control variables: demographics, weekly working
hours, general level of work engagement,
previous level of exhaustion, off-job activities,
relaxation during off-job time

Work activities
at home

Work activities predicted lower
detachment
Detachment mediated the
relationship between work
activities and
next-morning vigor

Volman et al.
(2013)

N = 65 employees from various occupations
(The Netherlands), 325 days
Within-person analysis, person-mean
centering of day-level predictor variables
Control variables: family status, general
well-being, self-family facilitation

Work-related
activities

Work-related activities
predicted lower detachment

Volmer et al.
(2012)

N = 98 civil service employees (Germany),
482 days
Within-person analysis, person-mean centering
of day-level predictor variables
Control variables: demographics, weekly
working hours

Social conﬂicts
with customers

Social conﬂicts with customers
predicted lower detachment and
higher negative work reﬂection
during evening hours

Note. *Study included between-person job stressors as predictor variables, in addition to within-person predictor variables.

(i.e., performing work tasks at home) was associated with lower levels of detachment from work. However, this
relationship was attenuated by boundary creation around ICTs.
In addition to the above-mentioned studies, some research has examined relationships between job stressors
and outcomes similar to psychological detachment such as rumination (Cropley & Purvis, 2003) or the
inability to withdraw from work (von Thiele Schwarz, 2011). For example, using a between-person design,
Cropley and Purvis found that employees in a high-strain group (high demands and low job control) reported
more ruminative thoughts than employees in a low-strain group. Similarly, von Thiele Schwarz (2011) showed
that job demands were associated with the inability to withdraw from work.
In summary, between-person studies suggest that a variety of job stressors are associated with lower psychological detachment during nonwork time, with so far the strongest support for workload and related variables
(overtime, work-related technology use at home, etc.).
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S91

Within-person studies
Studies focusing on within-person relationships between job stressors and psychological detachment conﬁrm
and expand ﬁndings from between-person studies. For example, with regard to workload, Sonnentag and
Bayer (2005) found that high chronic time pressure and long daily work hours predicted lower levels of
detachment during the evening. Furthermore, Volmer et al. (2012) reported that conﬂicts with costumers during
the workday were associated with lower levels of detachment as well as with higher negative work reﬂection
(i.e., negatively thinking about one’s work during nonwork time) during the evening. A recent study by Bono
et al. (2013) suggests that negative events during the workday were related to lower levels of detachment during
evening hours. Furthermore, ten Brummelhuis and Bakker (2012) as well as Volman et al. (2013) found that work
activities in the evening were associated with lower detachment reported at bedtime. In summary, ﬁndings from
within-person studies, while still limited, support ﬁndings from between-person studies demonstrating a negative
relationship between job stressors or negative events at work and psychological detachment from work during
nonwork time.

Psychological Detachment as a Mediator between Job Stressors and Strains
Research has started exploring the possible mediating role of psychological detachment in the relationship between
job stressors and strain outcomes. Job stressors deplete individual resources, which becomes apparent in increased
levels of strain and reduced well-being. Recovery from work stressors can occur when work-related demands and
stressors are removed, as for example indicated by high levels of detachment. Under high levels of job stressors,
employees have a harder time mentally disengaging from work during nonwork time due to increased negative
activation (e.g., negative affect and elevated physiological stress responses). This negative activation can result in
worry and rumination about the stressor, attempts to deal with the work-related problems, or engagement in
additional work tasks during nonwork time, all of which by deﬁnition imply a lack of detachment from work. For
example, high workload may require employees to engage in work-related tasks and conversations after hours,
or interpersonal conﬂict at work may increase attempts for problem solving and conﬂict resolution during
nonwork time. Because to date, so few studies have examined this meditational process, it is premature to differentiate ﬁndings for between-person versus within-person studies. Using a cross-sectional survey design,
Sonnentag, Kuttler, et al. (2010) found that detachment partially mediated the relationships between workload
and emotional dissonance on the one hand and exhaustion and need for recovery on the other hand. Similarly,
Kinnunen et al. (2011) found that job demands (time pressure, decision-making demands, and work hours) were
negatively related to psychological detachment, which in turn was negatively related to fatigue at work. Using
structural equation modeling, they found support for a full mediation. Similarly, Safstrom and Hartig (2013)
reported that detachment mediated the relationship between job demands and perceived stress as well as between
job demands and life satisfaction.
While ﬁndings from these studies need to be interpreted taking their cross-sectional design into account, several
other studies used longitudinal research designs to examine the question of mediation. von Thiele Schwarz (2011),
using a six-month time lag, found that a lack of withdrawal from work partially mediated the relationship between
job demands on the one hand and a decreased sense of recovery and increased fatigue on the other hand. A dailydiary within-person study identiﬁed psychological detachment as a mediator between work activities in the evening
after work and lower vigor the following morning (ten Brummelhuis & Bakker, 2012).
In summary, there is some support for the hypothesis that psychological detachment acts as a mediator between
job stressors and employee well-being. However, due to the small number of studies so far, the diverse research
designs (e.g. cross-sectional vs. longitudinal) and the diverse set of stressors examined, we hope that future research
will deepen our understanding of these meditational processes.
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S92

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

Psychological Detachment as a Moderator between Stressors and Strains
The stressor-detachment model proposes that psychological detachment from work during nonwork time is not only
a direct predictor of strain and impaired well-being but may also buffer the negative impact of job stressors. This
proposition is in line with the view that job stressors affect the employee not only at work but also when the stressor
is no longer present in a physical sense (Meurs & Perrewé, 2011), for instance, when remembering or anticipating a
stressful work situation while at home at night. When not detaching from work while at home, job stressors remain
mentally present and therefore may elicit strain reactions, such as fatigue, anxiety, physical symptoms, or impaired
sleep. Psychological detachment, however, entails letting go of work-related thoughts and mental representations of
the job stressors, allowing the employee to recover from them and to rebuild psychological resources, thereby
increasing well-being and reducing strain. As a result, psychological detachment should attenuate the negative
relationship between job stressors and strain. Thus, under high levels of detachment, the relationship between job
stressors and strain should be weaker than under low levels of detachment.
Some studies examined if psychological detachment indeed acts as a moderator in the relationship between job
stressors and strains or poor well-being. For example, Moreno-Jiménez, Rodrígez-Munoz, et al. (2009) found that
psychological detachment attenuated the relationship between workplace bullying and psychological strain. Similarly, Sonnentag et al. (2013) reported that psychological detachment attenuated the relationship between emotional
conﬂicts at work and poor well-being. Moreno-Jiménez et al. (2012) found that psychological detachment attenuated
the relationship between role conﬂict and anxiety (but not between role conﬂict and somatic complaints). In a
longitudinal study, psychological detachment moderated the relationship between quantitative job demands and
psychosomatic complaints as well as low work engagement (Sonnentag, Binnewies, et al., 2010). In most of these
studies, stressors were more strongly related to indicators of strain and poor well-being when psychological detachment was low. These ﬁndings suggest that psychological detachment can provide a mental break from job stressors
to reduce their negative impact.
A day-level study further showed that psychological detachment can act as a preventative measure (Korunka
et al., 2012). Speciﬁcally, when railway controllers experienced high levels of psychological detachment from work
before a night shift, high workload during the ﬁrst four hours of the shift was not related to an increase in fatigue,
while low levels of detachment before the shift were associated with an increase of fatigue. Derks and Bakker
(in press) found an interaction effect between frequency of employer-provided smartphone use and detachment:
employees who frequently used their smartphones experienced a high level of work–home interference on days when
their detachment level was low, but not when it was high. Thus, detachment attenuated the impact of frequent
smartphone use on work–home interference. In addition, research has shown that detachment from work during evening
hours attenuates the spillover from immediate strain reactions at work (e.g., negative affect) to strain reactions experienced later at home or even the following morning (Sonnentag & Binnewies, 2013).
Etzion et al. (1998) studied military service as a time period away from employees’ regular job and reported a
complex interaction between job stressors, detachment, and burnout. Speciﬁcally, they found that the relationship
between job stressors and burnout was weaker when detachment from the regular job was low and when the time
away from the regular job was experienced as positive. Thus, the combination between low detachment and
experiencing time off the regular job as positive acted as a moderator, suggesting that under certain circumstances,
not detaching might be beneﬁcial. Cheng and McCarthy (2013) reported that psychological detachment buffered the
relationship between workplace conﬂicts and poor work satisfaction only when in addition overall cognitive avoidance of conﬂicts was high. These two studies illustrate that under certain circumstances, psychological detachment
may interact with other variables in a rather complex way.
While the number of studies that have examined the moderating role of detachment is still limited, evidence so far
suggests that detachment has the potential to buffer the effects of job stressors on strains and poor well-being. As is
the case with other moderators in the stressor–strain process (e.g., Häusser, Mojzisch, Niesel, & Schulz-Hardt,
2010), interaction effects are often hard to detect. de Jonge and Dormann (2006) have argued that resources must
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S93

match the speciﬁc stressors in order to be effective. Accordingly, de Jonge et al. (2012) have suggested that the
speciﬁc way of detaching from work must match the speciﬁc stressors with cognitive demands requiring cognitive
detachment (i.e., putting thoughts about work aside) and emotional demands requiring emotional detachment (i.e.,
distancing oneself from work-related emotions). This idea, for instance, also implies that psychological detachment
should not help to reduce the effects of physical stressors because such stressors should impact on the organism
irrespective if one continues to think about them during nonwork time or not.
Moreover, the proposed buffering effect of psychological detachment partially contradicts the buffering effect of
social support. In order to receive social support from nonwork sources (e.g., family and friends), one needs to talk
about work-related topics during nonwork time. While talking about work—by deﬁnition—detachment cannot
occur. Future studies may aim at better understanding the possibly combined effects of psychological detachment
and social support on strain reactions and well-being. Possibly, experiencing social support (i.e., not detaching from
work) immediately after work may help detaching from work later on.

Discussion
Over the past decade, researchers have identiﬁed psychological detachment from work during nonwork time as an
important recovery experience. Using the stressor-detachment model as an organizing framework, this literature review
shows that job stressors are related to poor psychological detachment from work. Lack of psychological detachment in
turn is related to strain reactions and poor well-being—both between and within persons. Associations with life satisfaction and work engagement were rather consistent across between-person studies, whereas associations with more
transient positive affective states ﬂuctuating within shorter time periods were relatively scarce. Psychological detachment from work further seems to partially mediate the relationship between job stressors on one hand and strain and
well-being indicators on the other hand. In other studies, psychological detachment was found to be a moderator in
the stressor–strain relationship.
The ﬁnding that job stressors make psychological detachment more unlikely is not trivial because when facing job
stressors, employees will experience a higher need for recovery (De Croon, Sluiter, & Blonk, 2004). Thus, although
need for recovery increases when stressor levels are high, the most likely response to these stressors is not
detachment from work but keeping up a mental connection to work, possibly triggered by high levels of negative
activation. In the following section, we will discuss how the stressor-detachment model could be further extended.
We will suggest directions for future research and will elaborate on possible practical implications.

Expanding the stressor-detachment model
In this review, we have presented empirical evidence that job stressors predict poor psychological detachment,
which in turn predicts strain and poor well-being. Although, overall, empirical evidence supports this model, the
associations between the model’s core constructs might differ between individuals and situations. We now discuss
moderator variables that should be incorporated into an extended stressor-detachment model (see Figure 2). We base
our suggestions on conceptual arguments based on transactional stress theory (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984). Empirical
research on such moderator effects, however, is still scarce.
Based on transactional stress theory, we propose that the negative effects of job stressors on detachment are
moderated by (1) the attention a person directs to his or her job and associated stressors and (2) the resources that
help in dealing with the stressors (see arrow 5 in Figure 2). According to transactional stress theory, primary and
secondary appraisals are crucial in the stress process. During primary appraisal, an individual evaluates if an event
potentially threatens or harms his or her well-being. During secondary appraisal, an individual evaluates if anything
can be done to cope with the stressor. An implicit prerequisite for evaluating an event as threatening or harmful
during primary appraisal is that the individual directs at least some attention to this event and the context in which
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S94

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

Figure 2. Extended stressor-detachment model

it occurs. When an individual does not pay attention to the event and its context, the event cannot become relevant
for the individual’s well-being. Accordingly, we propose that directing attention toward work as a core life domain
will enhance the relationship between job stressors and lack of detachment, whereas directing attention toward life
domains outside of work will attenuate the relationship. Speciﬁcally, employees high in job involvement or workrole salience (Kanungo, 1982) will experience a stronger relationship between job stressors and poor detachment
than employees low in job involvement or work-role salience. When employees, however, direct attention toward
other life domains, job stressors lose their impact on detachment. In everyday life, both negative events (e.g., an
argument with one’s spouse) and positive events outside of work (e.g., engaging in one’s favorite hobby) that pull
attention away from work will reduce the impact of job stressors on poor detachment.
Moreover, an employee’s capability and willingness to shift attention from one life domain to another whenever
needed will attenuate the impact of job stressors on poor psychological detachment. Speciﬁcally, mindfulness
(i.e., “a state of consciousness characterized by receptive attention to and awareness of present events and
experiences, without evaluation, judgment, and cognitive ﬁlters”, Glomb, Duffy, Bono, & Yang, 2011, p. 119), acceptance (i.e., “the willingness to experience thoughts, feelings, and physiological sensations without having to control
them or let them determine one’s actions“, Bond & Bunce, 2003, p. 1057), and capacity for self-regulation (i.e., “high
personal capacity for self-control” Tangney, Baumeister, & Boone, 2004, p. 272) will play a role here.
Furthermore, boundary management between work and other domains is relevant. For instance, a high
segmentation preference (Kreiner, 2006)—implying not to pay attention to work-related matters when being at
home—should attenuate the effect of job stressors on detachment. However, not everyone may want to fully detach
from work during nonwork time. Employees who are fascinated and positively activated by their work may enjoy
directing their attention to their work and thinking about it when being at home. For these employees, a lack of
detachment might be a pleasant experience and may occur even when no stressors are present.
In addition to attentional processes, an employee’s personal and job resources—as evaluated during secondary
appraisal—should moderate the effect of job stressors on psychological detachment. For instance, employees who
have a high level of self-efﬁcacy and are conﬁdent that they are able to cope with the stressors (Jex & Bliese,
1999) will be less likely to continue thinking about the stressors during nonwork time. Similarly, employees who
experience high levels of social support at work (Halbesleben, 2006) will be more inclined to detach from work
during nonwork time because they know that others will help when needed. Lack of resources, however, will
strengthen the negative effect of job stressors on detachment because it is more likely that employees will feel
overwhelmed by the stressors when resources are lacking. In addition, negative affect will play a role here. When
experiencing negative affect, one views oneself in a more negative light (Watson & Clark, 1984), which makes it
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S95

difﬁcult to perceive available resources and to ﬁnd new resources that can help deal with the stressor. As a consequence, the inﬂuence of job stressors on poor detachment will be stronger when negative affect is high.
Overall, research summarized in this review shows that lack of psychological detachment is associated with strain
symptoms, low life satisfaction, and low work engagement. However, not all studies have provided evidence that
lack of detachment is associated with these outcomes, suggesting that there might be circumstances under which
lack of detachment is less harmful—or even positive. We propose that the content of one’s job-related thoughts
during nonwork time moderate the effect of detachment on strain and well-being outcomes (see arrow 6 in Figure 2).
Speciﬁcally, in line with transactional stress theory (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984), we suggest that lack of
detachment can lose or lessen its negative impact when—while staying mentally connected with one’s job during
nonwork time—job-related events are (re)appraised in a positive way and when job-related thoughts during
nonwork time are used in order to successfully cope with stressful events encountered at work.
Empirical studies show that thinking or talking about one’s job during nonwork time can have beneﬁcial effects, given
that the content is positive. For example, research on savoring and capitalization—deﬁned as “beneﬁcially interpreting
positive events” (Langston, 1994, p. 1112)—showed that disclosing positive job events to one’s spouse is associated with
positive affective states (Hicks & Diamond, 2008; Ilies, Keeney, & Scott, 2011). A related line of research suggests that
positively reﬂecting about one’s job during nonwork time predicts a decrease in exhaustion (Fritz & Sonnentag, 2005)
and an increase in positive affect (Sonnentag & Grant, 2012). Capitalizing on positive work events or positively reﬂecting
about work is incompatible with full psychological detachment from work. Thus, when the content of work-related
thought is positive, not detaching from work during nonwork time should be associated with positive outcomes.
Staying mentally connected to one’s job and refraining from detachment may enable problem-focused coping.
Research on coping has demonstrated that cognitively avoiding stressful topics can have detrimental long-term
effects (Eliot, Thrash, & Murayama, 2011), suggesting that detaching from work might have its downside, for instance
when mainly used as an avoidance strategy. Staying mentally connected to one’s job might offer avenues for solving the
problem and alleviating the stressful situation. In addition, fully detaching from work during nonwork time also implies
not talking about work at home. As a result, employees may miss the opportunity to receive social support—a coping
resource that is known to have beneﬁcial effects on health and well-being (Halbesleben, 2006).

Research implications
Although past research clearly shows relationships between job stressors, psychological detachment from work, and
strain and well-being, many questions still remain unanswered. Therefore, in the following paragraphs, we will highlight avenues for future research.
First, until now, past research has seen lack of detachment primarily in a negative light. Also in this review, we
have argued that lack of psychological detachment can explain how job stressors translate into strain and poor wellbeing. However, people do not only encounter stressors at work. They may enjoy praise and success (e.g., securing a
huge sale or winning an important grant); when in a resourceful environment, they generally tend to be highly
engaged and enthusiastic about their work (Schaufeli & Bakker, 2004). Positive affective states resulting from such
positive experiences spill over into the nonwork domain and can enrich nonwork life (Greenhaus & Powell, 2006).
Thus, not only job stressors but also highly activating positive events may make psychological detachment from work
difﬁcult, and after a positive day at work, employees may still think about it at night. Most likely, the effects of detaching
from such positive work events and experiences differ from the effects of detaching from a stressful situation. Whereas
detaching from a stressful experience should reduce strain, detaching from a positive experience implies to miss the opportunity to savor these experiences even further. Findings from a diary study (Sonnentag & Binnewies, 2013) support
this view: low levels of detachment were related to higher levels of positive affect on days when positive affect at work
was high than were high levels of detachment. Future studies should shed more light on the link between positive events
or experiences at work and subsequent lack of psychological detachment as well as on the link between lack of detachment and subsequent well-being when the work experience is a highly positive one. Importantly, in many people’s lives,
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S96

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

work is a combination of positive and negative events and experiences. Future studies may want to inform us how
people can capitalize on the positive events and experiences and detach from the more negative ones.
Second, future research should pay more attention to issues of causality. Although some studies overcame the
obvious shortcomings of cross-sectional designs by temporally separating the measurement of psychological detachment and employee outcomes (e.g., ten Brummelhuis & Bakker, 2012; Sonnentag et al., 2008), causal evidence
remains tentative. Therefore, studies with stronger designs are needed. A ﬁrst set of studies could use a quasiexperimental repeated-measurement approach comparing highly stressful periods with less stressful periods, such
as done in classical studies by Eden (1982, 1990). Psychological detachment would be the outcome variable in these
studies. A second set of studies could manipulate psychological detachment and assess strain and well-being as
outcome variables. Such studies could be designed as laboratory experiments or as randomized control trials, for
instance, within an intervention approach. In such intervention studies, it will be important to separate the effect of
detachment from the effects of other recovery experiences. In addition, future research should explore the possibility
of reverse causation. For example, it is possible that employees higher in burnout have a harder time detaching from
work (cf. Sonnentag, Arbeus, Mahn, & Fritz, in press), which in turn may lead to a higher level perceived job stressors.
Possibly, both causal processes occur simultaneously.
Third, future research should take a more differentiated perspective by systematically taking moderator variables
into account, addressing temporal issues, and examining the content of the detachment experiences in more detail.
As outlined above, assuming that job stressors impede psychological detachment for all individuals under all
circumstances might be too simplistic. In addition, lack of detachment might not always be related to strain and poor
well-being. Thus, it is an imperative to examine moderators to identify the boundary conditions of the stressordetachment model. Here, individual as well as situational characteristics—both their stable and their more dynamic,
ﬂuctuating aspects—should be addressed. Moreover, researchers should examine temporal dynamics in more detail.
An obvious question to be answered refers to the optimal length of a detachment period. How long does it take for
psychological detachment from work to unfold its beneﬁts? In addition, research attention should be given to the
temporal order of detachment periods versus periods of mental connection with one’s job. It might be that detachment is easier to achieve after having brought work matters to a cognitive closure. Finally, future studies should have
a closer look at the cognitions and emotions while staying mentally connected to one’s job. Positively reﬂecting
about work might have beneﬁts that are even stronger than fully refraining from work-related thoughts. The positive
effects of detachment, however, may be compromised when detachment is achieved by an absorbing, predominantly
negative experience such as conﬂicts in the family or thinking about ﬁnancial problems.
Fourth, future research on psychological detachment should pay more attention to the social, organizational, and
technological contexts. First studies suggest that psychological detachment may not occur in isolation and may not only
have an effect on the employee himself or herself (Hahn & Dormann, 2013; Park et al., 2011). Thus, researchers may
want to investigate how organizational norms and expectations about boundaries between work and nonwork life impact
on employees’ psychological detachment from work during nonwork time. In addition, researchers may address the
family environment more explicitly, both as a potential facilitator of detachment from work and a setting that is heavily
affected when an employee does not successfully detach from work. We suggest that future research on detachment take
into account new developments in technology and employees’ general connectivity with work during off-job hours.
Recent research, for example, shows that technology use for work purposes during nonwork time is associated with
lower levels of detachment (Park et al., 2011). Richardson and Thompson (2012) found that levels of mobile technology
use during evenings, weekends, and vacations were negatively associated with detachment from work. A study by
Barber and Jenkins (in press) supports these ﬁndings but also emphasizes that this relationship is moderated by boundary
creation around technology use.
In this paper, we have focused on psychological detachment from work during time episodes such as free
evenings or weekends. Future research may want to examine the effects of psychological detachment during
breaks at work. Studies suggest that engaging in work-related activities during lunch breaks is associated with
impaired affect during work and higher levels of fatigue at the end of the workday, particularly when having little
autonomy about how to spend the break (Trougakos et al., 2008; Trougakos, Hideg, Cheng, & Beal, in press). Research
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S97

in the ﬁeld of environmental psychology suggests that spending time in a natural environment that provides the experience of “being away” is associated with increased psychological and physiological recovery (Hartig, Evans, Jamner,
Davis, & Gärling, 2003). Thus, environmental settings may partially determine if psychological detachment actually occurs during a break. Without doubt, much more research is needed on work breaks, particularly because organizations
may have more inﬂuence on how employees spend their work breaks than on how they spend their leisure time. When
addressing work breaks, researchers should also consider the role of micro breaks, that is, short periods of time during
which the process of task accomplishment is halted (Fritz, Lam, & Spreitzer, 2011).

Practical implications
As described in this review, studies showed positive relationships between psychological detachment from work during
nonwork time and reduced strain and increased well-being. Therefore, establishing ways for employees to routinely
detach from work is important. Developing and implementing interventions that train employees in detaching from
work could thus be a low-cost, easy-to-implement way to improve employee well-being. Probably, the impact of a
detachment intervention will be most effective when a person’s initial level of detachment will be low. Interventions
could, for example, teach employees to develop clear physical or mental boundaries between work and nonwork
domains that will facilitate detachment (Ashforth, Kreiner, & Fugate, 2000). More speciﬁcally, such interventions could
include ideas from goal-setting theory (Locke & Latham, 1990), enabling employees to set goals for segmenting work
and nonwork domains. This could include the goal to avoid personal phone calls at work unless they are emergencies or
the goal to not check work-related emails until Monday morning at 7 AM.
Because research shows that being involved in work-related tasks during nonwork hours hinders psychological
detachment (Sonnentag & Bayer, 2005), employees may take steps to detach themselves from work each evening
by engaging in activities that are different from one’s work and by spending time with others that do not belong
to one’s work context. This step can reduce the number of contextual cues outside of work that may prime workers
to think about their work, thereby compromising full psychological detachment.
While interventions that help employees to better detach from work during nonwork time would be beneﬁcial,
organizations can take an active role in facilitating employee detachment, too. Speciﬁcally, supervisors may role
model speciﬁc detachment-related behaviors and create a climate that allows employees to develop and implement
individual strategies for detachment. Supervisors should further be trained to encourage employee detachment by
avoiding assigning nonessential work tasks during nonwork time and by avoiding less direct obstacles to detachment
(e.g., “why don’t you think about that proposal tonight and get back to me in the morning?”).
Our review clearly shows that job stressors—particularly workload, time pressure, and overtime—can impair
psychological detachment from work during nonwork time. Unfortunately, high workload and overtime are common
in a vast variety of occupations and may not be changed easily (Smith, Folkard, Tucker, & Evans, 2011). Therefore,
prioritizing job tasks and goal setting strategies are essential to help employees ﬁnd opportunities for detachment even
in situations of high workload. Again, supervisors play a crucial role in this process.
Thus, to ensure successful detachment from work, employees may develop speciﬁc routines that allow them to transition
from work to nonwork. For instance, they may make a to-do list for the next workday before they leave the ofﬁce in the
evening and use the commuting time to “emotionally let go” of the workday. Organizations as well as employees should
also be made aware that extremely stressful events in the workplace may call for additional time to detach (e.g., a vacation).
Research suggests that a lack of detachment can partially explain the relationship between job stressor and
employee strain reactions. Given the potential causal chain between stressors, detachment, and strain, it is important
for organizations and employees to realize that increased stressors can result in a negative spiral especially over an
extended period of time (Westman, Hobfoll, Chen, Davidson, & Laski, 2005). Thus, breaking the spiral through
increased psychological detachment during nonwork time is important to sustain long-term employee health and
well-being. Employees that focus on routinely detaching from work during nonwork time may be able to avoid
an increase in strain when job stressors are high.
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S98

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

Research on role of detachment provides information on how to interrupt or thwart the stressor–burnout relationship. This is of practical importance to organizations because of the high cost of employee burnout in terms of job
performance and job attitudes (e.g., intentions to remain with the organization). In addition, organizations need to
consider the health-related costs associated with burnout (e.g., health insurance claims, premiums, and productivity
loss due to absence and lateness). Thus, by providing employees with opportunities to detach from work during
nonwork time, organizations not only can help avoid and reduce burnout but can enhance employee involvement
at work through, for example, increased work engagement.
In terms of policy implications, research summarized in this paper suggests that it is important to limit the number of
work hours—as proposed, for instance, in the European Working Time Directive; but this is not enough. It is crucial that
other efforts to improve working conditions and reduce stressors are continued. In addition, at both organizational and
societal levels, an exclusive focus on work as the most important life domain should be questioned. Employees should
be encouraged to enjoy not thinking about work and to immerse themselves fully in other activities during nonwork time.

Overall conclusion
Overall, research summarized in this review suggests that lack of detachment is a core mechanism by which job stressors
translate into poor health and well-being. Therefore, it is crucial that employees exposed to a high level of job stressors
detach from work during nonwork time. Psychological detachment is a powerful process that helps to stay healthy and
productive during turbulent times. Paradoxically, employees detach less from work when facing a highly stressful job
situation in which detachment and effective recovery processes would be particularly needed. This ﬁnding illustrates
that detachment may not happen by itself but may require some self-regulatory effort. At the same time, it emphasizes
that organizations as well as employees need to take deliberate steps to facilitate detachment. From the organizational
side, the focus may lie on developing norms for detachment and work–nonwork segmentation, organizing and prioritizing workload, and offering supervisor and employee training. Employees should become more aware of their needs for
detachment and develop and implement speciﬁc strategies that help them detach from work on a regular basis in order to
effectively recover from work-related stress during nonwork time.

Author biographies
Sabine Sonnentag is a Full Professor of Work and Organizational Psychology at the University of Mannheim,
Germany. Her research addresses the question of how individuals can achieve sustainable high job performance and remain healthy at the same time. She studies recovery from job stress, proactive behavior, and self-regulation at work.
Charlotte Fritz is an Assistant Professor in Industrial and Organizational Psychology at Portland State University,
Oregon. She received her PhD from the Technical University Braunschweig (Germany) in 2005. Her research interests include job stress, work-life balance, and the role of work breaks in employee well-being and job performance.

References
American Psychological Association. (2013). 2013 work and well-being survey. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Ashforth, B. E., Kreiner, G. E., & Fugate, M. (2000). All in a day’s work: Boundaries and micro role transitions. Academy of
Management Review, 25, 472–491. doi: 10.5465/AMR.2000.3363315
Bakker, A. B. (2011). An evidence-based model of work engagement. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 265–269.
doi: 10.1177/0963721411414534
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S99

Bakker, A. B., Demerouti, E., Oerlemans, W., & Sonnentag, S. (2013). Workaholism and daily recovery: A day reconstruction
study of leisure activities. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 34, 87–107. doi: 10.1002/job.1796
Barber, L. K., & Jenkins, J. S. (in press). Creating technological boundaries to protect bedtime: Examining work home boundary
management, psychological detachment and sleep. Stress and Health. doi: 10.1002/smi.2536.
de Bloom, J., Geurts, S. A. E., & Kompier, M. A. J. (2012). Effects of short vacations, vacation activities and experiences on
employee health and well-being. Stress and Health, 28, 305–318. doi: 10.1002/smi.1434
de Bloom, J., Geurts, S. A. E., & Kompier, M. A. J. (2013). Vacation (after-)effects on employee health and well-being, and the
role of vacation activities, experiences and sleep. Journal of Happiness Studies, 14, 613–633. doi: 10.1007/s10902-012-9345-3
Bond, F. W., & Bunce, D. (2003). The role of acceptance and job control in mental health, job satisfaction, and work performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 1057–1067.
Bono, J. E., Glomb, T. M., Shen, W., Kim, E., & Koch, A. J. (2013). Building positive resources: Effects of positive events and
positive reﬂection on work-stress and health. Academy of Management Journal, 56, 1601–1626. doi: 10.5465/amj.2011.0272
Borkovec, T. D., Robinson, E., Pruzinsky, T., & DePree, J. A. (1983). Preliminary exploration of worry: Some characteristics and
processes. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 31, 321–324. doi: 10.1016/0005-7967(83)90121-3
Bowling, N. A., Beehr, T. A., & Grebner, S. (2012). Combating stress in organizations. In G. P. Hodgkinson, & J. K. Ford (Eds.),
International review of industrial and organizational psychology (Vol. 27, pp. 65–88). West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
ten Brummelhuis, L. L., & Bakker, A. B. (2012). Staying engaged during the week: The effect of off-job activities on next day
work engagement. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 17, 445–455. doi: 10.1037/a0029213
Burke, R. J., Koyuncu, M., & Fiksenbaum, L. (2009). Beneﬁts of recovery after work among Turkish manufacturing managers and professionals. Education, Business and Society: Contemporary Middle Eastern Issues, 2, 109–122. doi: 10.1108/17537980910960681
Casey, L. (2012). Stress and wellbeing in Australia in 2012: A state-of-the nation survey. Melbourne: Australian Psychological
Society.
Cheng, B. H., & McCarthy, J. M. (2013). Managing work, family, and school roles: Disengagement strategies can help and
hinder. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 18, 241–251. doi: 10.1037/a0032507
Craig, A., & Cooper, R. E. (1992). Symptoms of acute and chronic fatigue. In A. P. Smith, & D. M. Jones (Eds.), Handbook of
human performance (Vol. 3, pp. 289–339). London: Academic Press.
Cropley, M., & Purvis, L. M. (2003). Job strain and rumination about work issues during leisure time: A diary study. European
Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 12, 195–207. doi: 10.1080/13594320344000093
Daniels, K. (2011). Stress and well-being are still issues and something still needs to be done: Or why agency and interpretation
are importance for policy and practice. In G. P. Hodghkinson, & J. K. Ford (Eds.), International review of industrial and
organizational psychology (Vol. 26, pp. 1–45). Chichester: Wiley.
Davidson, O. B., Eden, D., Westman, M., Cohen-Charash, Y., Hammer, L. B., Kluger, A. N., … Spector, P. E. (2010). Sabbatical
leave: Who gains and how much? Journal of Applied Psychology, 95, 953–964. doi: 10.1037/a0020068
deCroon, E. M., Sluiter, J. K., Blonk, R. W., Broersen, J. P. J. & Frings-Dresen, M. H. W. (2004). Stressful work, psychological
job strain, and turnover: A 2-year prospective cohort study of truck drivers. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89, 442–454.
doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.89.3.442
Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., Geurts, S. A. E., & Taris, T. W. (2009). Daily recovery from work-related effort during non-work time.
In P. L. Perrewé, D. C. Ganster, & S. Sonnentag (Eds.), Research in organizational stress and well-being (Vol. 7, pp. 85–123).
Oxford, England: Emerald Publishing Group.
Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., Sonnentag, S., & Fullagar, C. J. (2012). Work-related ﬂow and energy at work and at home: A
study on the role of daily recovery. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 33, 276–295. doi: 10.1002/job.760
Demsky, C. A., Ellis, A. M., & Fritz, C. (in press). Shrugging it off: Does psychological detachment mediate the relationship
between workplace aggression and work–family conﬂict? Journal of Occupational Health Psychology.
Derks, D., & Bakker, A. B. (in press). Smartphone use, work–home interference, and burnout: A diary study on the role of
recovery. Applied Psychology: An International Review. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2012.00530.x
Dewe, P., & Cooper, C. (2007) Coping research and measurement in the context of work related stress. In G. P. Hodgkinson,
& J. K. Ford (Eds.), International review of industrial and organizational psychology (Vol. 22, pp. 141–191). Chichester,
UK: Wiley.
Donahue, E. G., Forest, J., Vallerand, R. J., Lemyre, P.-N., Crevier-Braud, L., & Bergeron, E. (2012). Passion for work and emotional exhaustion: The mediating role of rumination and recovery. Applied Psychology: Health and Well-Being, 4, 341–368.
doi: 10.1111/j.1758-0854.2012.01078.x
Eden, D. (1982). Critical job events, acute stress, and strain: A multiple interrupted time series. Organizational Behavior and
Human Performance, 30, 312–329. doi: 10.1016/0030-5073(82)90223-9
Eden, D. (1990). Acute and chronic job stress, strain and vacation relief. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 45, 175–193. doi: 10.5465/AMBPP.1987.17534117
Edwards, J. R. (1992). A cybernetic theory of stress, coping, and well-being in organizations. Academy of Management Review,
17, 238–274. doi: 10.5465/AMR.1992.4279536
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S100

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

Eliot, A. J., Thrash, T. M., & Murayama, K. (2011). A longitudinal analysis of self-regulation and well-being: Avoidance
personal goals, avoidance coping, stress generation, and subjective well-being. Journal of Personality, 79, 643–674. doi:
10.1111/j.1467-6494.2011.00694.x
Etzion, D., Eden, D., & Lapidot, Y. (1998). Relief from job stressors and burnout: Reserve service as a respite. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 83, 577–585. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.83.4.577
Eurofond. (2012). Fifth European working conditions survey. Luxembourg: Publications Ofﬁce of the European Union. doi:
10.2806/34660
Feuerhahn, N., Sonnentag, S., & Woll, A. (2014). Exercise after work, psychological mediators, and affect: A day-level study.
European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 23, 62–79. doi: 10.1080/1359432X.2012.709965
Flaxman, P. E., Ménard, J., Bond, F. W., & Kinman, G. (2012). Academics’ experiences of a respite from work: Effects of selfcritical perfectionism and perseverative cognition on postrespite well-being. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97, 854–865. doi:
10.1037/a0028055
Fritz, C., & Sonnentag, S. (2005). Recovery, health, and job performance: Effects of weekend experiences. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 10, 187–199. doi: 10.1037/1076-8998.10.3.187
Fritz, C., Sonnentag, S., Spector, P. E., & McInroe, J. (2010). The weekend matters: Relationships between stress recovery and
affective experiences. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 31, 1137–1162. doi: 10.1002/job.672
Fritz, C., Yankelevich, M., Zarubin, A., & Barger, P. (2010). Happy, healthy and productive: The role of detachment from work
during nonwork time. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95, 977–983. doi: 10.1037/a0019462
Fritz, C., Lam, C. F., & Spreitzer, G. M. (2011). It’s the little things that matter: An examination of knowledge workers’ energy
management. Academy of Management Perspectives, 23(3), 28–39. doi: 10.5465/AMP.2011.63886528
Ganster, D. C., & Rosen, C. C. (2013). Work stress and employee health: A multidisciplinary review. Journal of Management,
39, 1085–1122. doi: 10.1177/0149206313475815
Ganster, D. C., Fox, M. L., & Dwyer, D. J. (2001). Explaining employees’ health care costs: A prospective examination of stressful job demands, personal control, and physiological reactivity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 954–964. doi: 10.1037/
0021-9010.86.5.954
Geurts, S. A. E., & Sonnentag, S. (2006). Recovery as an explanatory mechanism in the relation between acute stress reactions and
chronic health impairment. Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment and Health, 32, 482–492. doi: 10.5271/sjweh.1053
Glomb, T. M., Duffy, M. K., Bono, J. E., & Yang, T. (2011). Mindfulness at work. Research in Personnel and Human Resources
Management, 30, 115–157.
Greenhaus, J. H., & Powell, G. N. (2006). When work and family are allies: A theory of work–family enrichment. Academy of
Management Journal, 31, 72–92. doi: 10.5465/AMR.2006.19379625
Grifﬁn, M. A., & Clarke, S. (2011). Stress and well-being at work. In S. Zedeck (Ed.), APA handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (Vol. 3: Maintaining, expanding, and contracting the organization, pp. 359–397). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
Gross, S., Semmer, N. K., Meier, L. L., Kälin, W., Jacobshagen, N., & Tschan, F. (2011). The effect of positive events
at work on after-work fatigue: They matter most in face of adversity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 96, 654–664.
doi: 10.1037/a0022992
Hahn, V. C., & Dormann, C. (2013). The role of partners and children for employees’ psychological detachment from work and
well-being. Journal of Applied Psychology, 98, 26–36. doi: 10.1037/a0030650
Hahn, V., Binnewies, C., & Haun, S. (2012). The role of partners for employees’ recovery during the weekend. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 80, 288–298. doi: 10.1016/j.jvb.2011.12.004
Hahn, V. C., Binnewies, C., Sonnentag, S., & Mojza, E. J. (2011). Learning how to recover from job stress: Effects of a recovery
training program on recovery, recovery-related self-efﬁcacy and well-being. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 16,
202–216. doi: 10.1037/a0022169
Halbesleben, J. R. B. (2006). Sources of social support and burnout: A meta-analytic test of the conservation of resources model.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 91, 1134–1145. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.91.5.1134
Hartig, T., Evans, G. W., Jamner, L. D., Davis, D. S., & Gärling, T. (2003). Tracking restoration in natural and urban ﬁeld
settings. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 23, 109–123. doi: 10.1016/S0272-4944(02)00109-3
Häusser, J. A., Mojzisch, A., Niesel, M., & Schulz-Hardt, S. (2010). Ten years on: A review of recent research on the job
demand–control(–support) model and psychological well-being. Work & Stress, 24, 1–35. doi: 10.1080/02678371003683747
Hicks, A. M., & Diamond, L. M. (2008). How was your day? Couples’ affect when telling and hearing daily events. Personal
Relationships, 15, 205–228. doi: 10.1111/j.1475-6811.2008.00194.x
Hobfoll, S. E. (1998). Stress, culture, and community: The psychology and physiology of stress. New York: Plenum.
Ilies, R., Dimotakis, N., & De Pater, I. E. (2010). Psychological and physiological reactions to high workloads: Implications for
well-being. Personnel Psychology, 63, 407–436. doi: 10.1111/j.1744-6570.2010.01175.x
Ilies, R., Keeney, J., & Scott, B. A. (2011). Work–family interpersonal capitalization: Sharing positive events at home. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 114, 115–126. doi: 10.1016/j.obhdp.2010.10.008

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S101

Ilies, R., Schwind, K. M., Wagner, D. T., Johnson, M. D., DeRue, D. S., & Ilgen, D. R. (2007). When can employees have a
family life? The effects of daily workload and affect on work–family conﬂict and social behavior at work. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 92, 1368–1379. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.92.5.1368
Jex, S. M., & Bliese, P. D. (1999). Efﬁcacy beliefs as a moderator of the impact of work-related stressors: A multilevel study.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 84, 349–361. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.84.3.349
de Jonge, J., & Dormann, C. (2006). Stressors, resources, and strain at work: A longitudinal test of the triple-match principle.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 91, 1359–1374. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.91.5.1359
de Jonge, J., Spoor, E., Sonnentag, S., Dormann, C., & van den Tooren, M. (2012). “Take a break?!” Off-job recovery, job
demands, and job resources as predictors of health, active learning, and creativity. European Journal of Work and Organizational
Psychology, 21, 321–348. doi: 10.1080/1359432X.2011.576009
Kahn, R. L., & Byosiere, P. (1992). Stress in organizations. In M. D. Dunnette, & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial
and organizational psychology (2nd ed., Vol. 3, pp. 571–650). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Kanungo, R. N. (1982). Measurement of job and work involvement. Journal of Applied Psychology, 67, 341–349. doi: 10.1037/
0021-9010.67.3.341
Kinnunen, U., & Feldt, T. (2013). Job characteristics, recovery experiences and occupational well-being: Testing cross-lagged
relationships across 1 year. Stress and Health. doi: 10.1002/smi.2483
Kinnunen, U., Feldt, T., Siltaloppi, M., & Sonnentag, S. (2011). Job demands–resources model in the context of recovery:
Testing recovery experiences as mediators. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 1–28. doi: 10.1080/
1359432X.2010.524411
Korunka, C., Kubicek, B., Prem, R., & Cvitan, A. (2012). Recovery and detachment between shifts, and fatigue during a twelvehour shift. Work, 41, 3227–3233. doi: 10.3233/WOR-2012-0587-3227
Kreiner, G. (2006). Consequences of work-home segmentation or integration: a person–environment ﬁt perspective. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 27, 485–507. doi: 10.1002/job.386
Kühnel, J., & Sonnentag, S. (2011). How long do you beneﬁt from vacation? A closer look at the fade-out of vacation effects.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 32, 125–143. doi: 10.1002/job.699
Kühnel, J., Sonnentag, S., & Westman, M. (2009). Does work engagement increase after a short respite? The role of job involvement as a double-edged sword. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 82, 575–594. doi: 10.1348/
096317908X349362
Langston, C. A. (1994). Capitalizing on and coping with daily-life events: Expressive responses to positive events. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 1112–1125. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.67.6.1112
Lazarus, R. S., & Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New York: Springer.
Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. O. (1990). A theory of goal setting and task performance. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Martin, L. L., & Tesser, A. (1996). Some ruminative thoughts. In R. S. Wyer (Ed.), Ruminative thoughts (pp. 1–47). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
McEwen, B. S. (1998). Protective and damaging effects of stress mediators. New England Journal of Medicine, 338, 171–179.
doi: 10.1056/NEJM199801153380307
Meijman, T. F., & Mulder, G. (1998). Psychological aspects of workload. In P. J. D. Drenth, & H. Thierry (Eds.), Handbook of
work and organizational psychology, vol. 2: Work psychology (pp. 5–33). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Meurs, J. A., & Perrewé, P. L. (2011). Cognitive activation theory of stress: An integrative theoretical approach to work stress.
Journal of Management, 37, 1043–1068. doi: 10.1177/0149206310387303
Mojza, E. J., Sonnentag, S., & Bornemann, C. (2011). Volunteer work as a valuable leisure time activity: A day-level study on
volunteer work, non-work experiences, and well-being at work. Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 84,
123–152. doi: 10.1348/096317910X485737
Moreno-Jiménez, B., Mayo, M., Sanz-Vergel, A. I., Geurts, S. A. E., Rodrígez-Munoz, A., & Garrosa, E. (2009). Effects of
work–family conﬂict on employee’s well-being: The moderating role of recovery experiences. Journal of Occupational Health
Psychology, 14, 427–440. doi: 10.1037/a0016739
Moreno-Jiménez, B., Rodrígez-Munoz, A., Pastor, J.-C., Sanz-Vergel, A. I., & Garrosa, E. (2009). The moderating effect of
psychological detachment and thoughts of revenge in workplace bullying. Personality and Individual Differences, 46, 359–364.
doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2008.10.031
Moreno-Jiménez, B., Rodrígez-Munoz, A., Sanz-Vergel, A. I., & Garrosa, E. (2012). Elucidating the role of recovery experiences
in the job demands-resources model. The Spanish Journal of Psychology, 15, 659–669.
Newman, D. B., Tay, L., & Diener, E. (in press). Leisure and subjective well-being: A model of psychological mechanisms as
mediating factors. Journal of Happiness Studies. doi: 10.1007/s10902-013-9435-x.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Wisco, B. E., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2008). Rethinking rumination. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3,
400–424. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-6924.2008.00088.x
Oosthuizen, J., Mostert, K., & Koekemoer, F. E. (2011). Job characteristics, work–nonwork interference and the role of recovery strategies amongst employees in a tertiary institution. SA Journal of Human Resource Management, 9, 1–15. doi: 10.4102/sajhrm
Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

S102

S. SONNENTAG AND C. FRITZ

Ouellette, J. A., & Wood, W. (1998). Habit and intention in everyday life: The multiple processes by which past behavior predicts
future behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 54–74. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.124.1.54
Park, Y. A., Fritz, C., & Jex, S. M. (2011). Relationships between work–home segmentation and psychological detachment from
work: The role of communication technology use at home. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 16, 457–467. doi:
10.1037/a0023594
Ployhart, R. E., & Moliterno, T. P. (2011). Emergence of the human capital resource: A multilevel model. Academy of Management
Review, 36, 127–150.
Potok, Y., & Littman-Ovadia, H. (2014). Does personality regulate the work stressor–psychological detachment relationship?
Journal of Career Assessment, 22, 43–58. doi: 10.1177/1069072713487853
Querstret, D., & Cropley, M. (2012). Exploring the relationship between work-related rumination, sleep quality, and work-related
fatigue. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 17, 341–353. doi: 10.1037/a0028552
Ragsdale, J. M., Beehr, T. A., Grebner, S., & Han, K. (2011). An integrated model of weekday stress and weekend recovery of
students. International Journal of Stress Management, 18, 153–180. doi: 10.1037/a0023190
Richardson, K., & Thompson, C. 2012. High tech tethers and work–family conﬂict: A conservation of resources approach.
Engineering Management Research, 1, 29–43. doi: 10.5539/emr.v1n1p29
Rodell, J. B., & Judge, T. A. (2009). Can “good” stressors spark “bad” behaviors? The mediating role of emotions in links of
challenge and hindrance stressors with citizenship and counterproductive behaviors. Journal of Applied Psychology, 94,
1438–1451. doi: 10.1037/a0016752
Safstrom, M., & Hartig, T. (2013). Psychological detachment in the relationship between job stressors and strain. Behavioral
Sciences, 3, 418–433. doi: 10.3390/bs3030418
Sanz-Vergel, A. I., Demerouti, E., Bakker, A. B., & Moreno-Jiménez, B. (2011). Daily detachment from work and home: The
moderating effect of role salience. Human Relations, 64, 775–799. doi: 10.1177/0018726710393368
Sanz-Vergel, A. I., Sebastián, J., Rodrígez-Munoz, A., Garrosa, E., Moreno-Jiménez, B., & Sonnentag, S. (2010). Adaptación der
“Cuestionario de Experiencias de Recuperación” a una muestra espanola. Psicothema, 22, 990–996.
Schaufeli, W. B., & Bakker, A. B. (2004). Job demands, job resources, and their relationship with burnout and engagement: a
multi-sample study. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 25, 293–315. doi: 10.1002/job.248
Segerstrom, S. C., Stanton, A. L., Alden, L. E., & Shortridge, B. E. (2003). A multidimensional structure of repetitive thought:
What’s on your mind, and how, and how much? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 909–921. doi: 10.1037/
0022-3514.85.5.909
Shimazu, A., Sonnentag, S., Kubota, K., & Kawakami, N. (2012). Validation of the Japanese version of the Recovery Experience
Questionnaire. Journal of Occupational Health, 54, 196–205. doi: 10.1539/joh.11-0220-OA
Siltaloppi, M., Kinnunen, U., & Feldt, T. (2009). Recovery experiences as moderators between psychological work characteristics and occupational well-being. Work & Stress, 23, 330–348. doi: 10.1080/02678370903415572
Smith, C. S., Folkard, S., Tucker, P., & Evans, M. S. (2011). Work schedules, health and safety. In J. C. Quick, & L. E. Tetrick
(Eds.), Handbook of occupational health psychology (2nd ed., pp. 185–204). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Sonnentag, S. (2010). Recovery from fatigue: The role of psychological detachment. In P. L. Ackerman (Ed.), Cognitive fatigue:
The current status and future for research and application (pp. 253–272). Washington, CD: American Psychological
Association. doi: 10.1037/12343-012
Sonnentag, S., & Bayer, U.-V. (2005). Switching off mentally: Predictors and consequences of psychological detachment from
work during off-job time. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 10, 393–414. doi: 10.1037/1076-8998.10.4.393
Sonnentag, S., & Binnewies, C. (2013). Daily affect spillover from work to home: Detachment from work and sleep as
moderators. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 83, 198–208. doi: 10.1016/j.jvb.2013.03.008
Sonnentag, S., & Frese, M. (2012). Stress in organizations. In N. W. Schmitt, & S. Highhouse (Eds.), Handbook of psychology.
Volume 12: Industrial and organizational psychology (2nd ed., pp. 560–592). Hoboken: Wiley.
Sonnentag, S., & Fritz, C. (2006). Endocrinological processes associated with job stress: Catecholamine and cortisol responses to
acute and chronic stressors. In P. L. Perrewé, & D. C. Ganster (Eds.), Research in organizational stress and well-being:
Employee health, coping and methodologies (pp. 1–59). Amsterdam: Elsevier. doi: 10.1016/S1479-3555(05)05001-8
Sonnentag, S., & Fritz, C. (2007). The Recovery Experience Questionnaire: Development and validation of a measure assessing
recuperation and unwinding from work. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 12, 204–221. doi: 10.1037/10768998.12.3.204
Sonnentag, S., & Grant, A. M. (2012). Doing good at work feels good at home, but not right away: When and why perceived
prosocial impact predicts positive affect. Personnel Psychology, 65, 495–530. doi: 10.1111/j.1744-6570.2012.01251.x
Sonnentag, S., & Kruel, U. (2006). Psychological detachment from work during off-job time: The role of job stressors, job
involvement, and recovery-related self-efﬁcacy. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 15, 197–217.
doi: 10.1080/13594320500513939
Sonnentag, S., Arbeus, H., Mahn, C., & Fritz, C. (in press). Exhaustion and lack of psychological detachment from work during
off-job time: Moderator effects of time pressure and leisure experiences. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

THE STRESSOR-DETACHMENT MODEL

S103

Sonnentag, S., Binnewies, C., & Mojza, E. J. (2008). “Did you have a nice evening?” A day-level study on recovery experiences,
sleep, and affect. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93, 674–684. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.93.3.674
Sonnentag, S., Binnewies, C., & Mojza, E. J. (2010). Staying well and engaged when demands are high: The role of psychological detachment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 95, 965–976. doi: 10.1037/a0020032
Sonnentag, S., Kuttler, I., & Fritz, C. (2010). Job stressors, emotional exhaustion, and need for recovery: A multi-source study on
the beneﬁts of psychological detachment. Journal of Vocational Behavior, 76, 355–365. doi: 10.1016/j.jvb.2009.06.005
Sonnentag, S., Mojza, E. J., Binnewies, C., & Scholl, A. (2008). Being engaged at work and detached at home: A week-level study on
work engagement, psychological detachment, and affect. Work & Stress, 22, 257–276. doi: 10.1080/02678370802379440
Sonnentag, S., Unger, D., & Nägel, I. J. (2013). Workplace conﬂict and employee well-being: The moderating role of detachment
from work during off-job time. International Journal of Conﬂict Management, 24, 166–183. doi: 10.1108/10444061311316780
Tangney, J. P., Baumeister, R. F., & Boone, A. L. (2004). High self-control predicts good adjustment, less pathology, better
grades, and interpersonal success. Journal of Personality, 72, 271–322. doi: 10.1111/j.0022-3506.2004.00263.x
Theorell, T., & Karasek, R. A. (1996). Current issues relating to psychosocial job strain and cardiovascular disease research.
Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 1, 9–26. doi: 10.1037/h0090330
von Thiele Schwarz, U. (2011). Inability to withdraw from work as related to poor next-day recovery and fatigue among women.
Applied Psychology: An International Review, 60, 377–396. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2011.00440.x
Trougakos, J. P., Beal, D. J., Green, S. G., & Weiss, H. M. (2008). Making the break count: An episodic examination of recovery
activities, emotional experiences, and positive affective displays. Academy of Management Journal, 51, 131–146. doi:
10.5465/AMJ.2008.30764063
Trougakos, J. P., Hideg, I., Cheng, B. H., & Beal, D. J. (in press). Lunch breaks unpacked: The role of autonomy as a moderator
of recovery during lunch. Academy of Management Journal. doi: 10.5465/amj.2011.1072
Ursin, H., & Eriksen, H. R. (2010). Cognitive activation theory of stress (CATS). Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Review, 34,
877–881. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2009.03.001
Volman, F. E., Bakker, A. B., & Xanthopoulou, D. (2013). Recovery at home and performance at work: A diary study on self–family
facilitation. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 22, 218–234. doi: 10.1080/1359432X.2011.648375
Volmer, J., Binnewies, C., Sonnentag, S., & Niessen, C. (2012). Do social conﬂicts with customers at work encroach upon our
private lives? A diary study. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 17, 304–315. doi: 10.1037/a0028454
Watkins, E. R. (2008). Constructive and unconstructive repetitive thought. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 163–206. doi: 10.1037/
0033-2909.134.2.163
Watson, D., & Clark, L. A. (1984). Negative affectivity: The disposition to experience aversive emotional states. Psychological
Bulletin, 96, 465–490. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.96.3.465
Westman, M., & Eden, D. (1997). Effects of a respite from work on burnout: Vacation relief and fade-out. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 82, 516–527. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.82.4.516
Westman, M., Hobfoll, S. E., Chen, S., Davidson, O. B., & Laski, S. (2005). Organizational stress through the lens of conservation of resources (COR) theory. In P. L. Perrewe, & D. C. Ganster (Eds.), Research in occupational stress and well-being
(Vol. 4, pp. 167–220). Amsterdam: JAI Press.
Zohar, D., Tzischinski, O., & Epstein, R. (2003). Effects of energy availability on immediate and delayed emotional reactions to
work events. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88, 1082–1093. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.88.6.1082

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

This content downloaded from
137.45.157.40 on Wed, 13 Nov 2024 21:05:26 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

J. Organiz. Behav. 36, S72–S103 (2015)
DOI: 10.1002/job

