Behavior Research Methods
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-022-02045-6

VOIS: A framework for recording Voice Over Internet Surveys
Teresa Ristow1 · Ivan Hernandez1
Accepted: 1 December 2022
© The Psychonomic Society, Inc. 2023

Abstract
Verbal data provide researchers insight beyond that offered by text-based responses, including tone, reasoning elaboration,
and experienced difficulty, among other processes. Additionally, it offers a less cognitively taxing way for participants to
provide long responses. Verbal data collection methods are found in a variety of fields, mostly conducted in lab-based settings
or requiring specialized hardware. Restricting verbal protocols to lab-based settings can have several drawbacks, including
smaller sample sizes, biased populations, reduced adoption, and incompatibility with potential social distancing requirements.
No method currently exists for researchers to collect verbal data within major online survey collection platforms. The current paper offers a user-friendly approach for collecting verbal data online, where a researcher can copy and paste JavaScript
code into the desired survey platform. By providing a framework that does not require any advanced programming ability,
researchers can collect verbal data in a scalable way using familiar modalities.
Keywords Experimental design · Verbal protocol · Voice data · MTurk · Survey platform
“Verbal protocol” describes a type of method for collecting and analyzing voice recordings from participants to
gain insight beyond more traditional and observationally
based techniques (Zainal Abidin et al., 2009). Verbal protocols provide oral records of participants’ thoughts during thinking-aloud processes while participants work on a
specified task or after completion of a task (Kasper, 1998).
This elaboration can provide insight into a variety of cognitive psychological tasks such as problem-solving, knowledge acquisition, memory tasks, learning processes, judgement, human-computer interaction, reading and writing, and
decision-making (Biggs et al., 1993; Krahmer & Ummelen,
2004; Van Someren et al., 1994). Incorporating recording
requires minimal changes from a survey design task because
audio is recorded passively. The only change is that participants are instructed to narrate their thoughts, rather than
leave them internal during task completion. Therefore, incorporating voice recording into study designs offers additional
information into a variety of social and cognitive processes,
in a way that generalizes easily across study designs. The
limitation to using this methodology is the technical issue of
* Teresa Ristow
tristow@vt.edu
1

Department of Psychology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24060, USA

having a recorder present during the study, especially when
the study is done remotely across hundreds of participants,
as is common in survey data collection.

Usage of verbal protocols across behavioral
fields
Think‑aloud tasks
Verbal protocol methods are often used in think-aloud studies. These studies require participants to speak aloud any
words that come to mind as they complete a task, while
researchers record participants’ voices (Charters, 2003).
Additionally, participants can record their thoughts retrospectively after the completion of a task. Concurrent and
retrospective verbal protocols provide distinct, but equally
useful methods of obtaining data on thought processes
(Crutcher, 1994). Tasks relevant for think-aloud designs can
include memorization tasks, problem-solving tasks, puzzles,
and economic games, which all involve complex cognitive
processes leading to a final decision or answer (Ericsson,
2006).
Voice data from verbal protocol methods offer important
data to supplement observations and task results. Thinking
is a sequence of thoughts used to get from one processing

Vol.:(0123456789)
1
3

Behavior Research Methods

activity to another often manifested in subvocalization (Ericsson & Simon, 1998). Therefore, recording thoughts provides insight into unobservable cognitive processes required
to complete certain commonly researched tasks (Austin &
Delaney, 1998). Although researchers could ask participants
to write their thoughts, voice recording provides a less intrusive, timely, and more natural way for participants to express
their thought process. Thus, the verbalization of thoughts is
seen as one of the most direct methods to study deliberative
cognitive processes for complex tasks (Krahmer & Ummelen, 2004). This benefit stems from the immediacy between
the task being done and the verbal report of the action. Participants typically have no time to exert the cognitive effort
required to adjust or manipulate their verbal report of their
actions during or after a task (Van Someren et al., 1994).

Methods to collect vocal data
In order to capture vocal data in experimental studies,
researchers utilize a variety of techniques, mechanisms, and
hardware. When the experimental setting is in a lab, typically the materials and recording equipment are provided to
the participant by the experimenter. Commonly, the materials used for studies within a laboratory setting include an
apparatus that consists of a microcomputer equipped with a
megahertz processor, a sound card for storage of the recording files, and headphones or a headset with a microphone
(Wirth et al., 2000). Laboratories that may not have access
to computers or all the equipment suggested for verbal protocol data collection can opt for simply audio recording a
participant as they complete a think-aloud protocol, which
the researchers or assistants can later transcribe for analysis
(Hoffman et al., 2009). As a means to avoid the tedious task
of transcribing vocal recordings, researchers may instead
use two-way radio and single earbud-microphone systems
to enter verbal data as it is being spoken, which is traditionally called “bug-in-ear” (BIE) technology (Goodman et al.,
2008). However, many of these methods and devices used
in the lab limit the researcher from obtaining larger sets of
data because of the configuration and demonstration of the
technology required for each participant.
Additionally, researchers may utilize specifically developed devices for accessing and collecting vocal data outside of the laboratory setting. The Electronically Activated
Recorder (EAR) is a device designed to be used exclusively
for vocal recording out of the lab. It consists of a microcassette tape recorder and a tie-clip microphone, as an unobtrusive means for at-home vocal data collection (Mehl et al.,
2001). Specifically, the EAR was created to be used with an
experience sampling methodology (ecological momentary
assessment, EMA), where participants fill out questionnaires
several times a day in their own homes. The EAR can help
researchers gain insight into the thought process of those

13

participants while they fill out surveys using a think-aloud
protocol. This can provide vocal data in addition to data
collected via EMA, which uses several types of tools (such
as cell phones or fitness trackers) that collect psychological or physiological data moment-by-moment in real-world
situations. While EAR technology avoids the pitfalls that
come from using vocal protocol collection devices within
the lab, such as increased researcher effort and scalability
of data collected, there are still some major concerns with
the EAR. The most prevalent issue with the EAR is that
participants may feel hesitant to record vocal data outside
of the lab due to privacy concerns. Additionally, participants
are required to set up the equipment on their own at home.
This independence can subsequently lead to a loss of data
if any participants have technical difficulties, which is more
common outside of the lab, even if they are taught how to
use the device in the lab.
In addition to the EAR device, other technology is
utilized to collect vocal data online and outside of the
lab. While the EAR functions with the same recording
mechanisms as devices used in a laboratory setting, there
are methods that use online capabilities to record vocal
data outside of the lab. A popular method of online voice
protocol recording is Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
(Goode, 2002). VoIP is a stand-alone Internet application that records high-quality voice data over the Internet.
However, if it is used with an online survey platform, it
must be opened in separate windows which may be cumbersome and contain problems with timing for participant
vocal recording. Additionally, VoIP may suffer from low
voice quality depending on an individual participant’s
Internet speed or router connection. Another option for
online vocal protocol data collection uses a telephone
to place a call and receive voice over the Internet. This
method utilizes the VoIP technology and applies it to a
telephone system (Jones et al., 2000). This allows participants who may not have access to or be familiar with
online recording systems to simply call a number and have
their voice recorded for the researchers to access as an
electronic mail message. While this means of vocal data
collection is easier for participants unfamiliar with computers, it is inefficient and requires considerable setup on
the side of the researcher. A more dated option that exists
for at-home voice data collection is using a two-way call
during the voice protocol task with Network Voice Protocol (NVP-II). This technology avoids the Internet entirely
and simply records vocal data via telephone (Cohen et al.,
1981). All of the current methods lack a way to effectively
download or access more than one participant’s recording at a time. This may lead to large amounts of time
spent with data entry post vocal data collection. While
the NVP-II technology is the oldest mentioned, the most
recent device used to collect voice data is still only from

Behavior Research Methods

an article published in 2009. This shows that much of the
published means of collecting voice data during verbal
protocol tasks are fairly dated and have not been updated
by academics for over 10 years. Despite the dated methods of collecting voice data, there are still a variety of
constructs that can be measured by these means, however
ineffective.
More recently, developments in technology have facilitated online and updated means of utilizing vocal protocols to access vocally recorded data. One example is
when Cauldron Science introduced Gorilla in 2016 which
provides researchers with a tool to develop and build their
own online experiments (Cauldron Science, 2016). This
platform provides more experiment-based research options
than more traditional survey platforms. This includes
options to collect participant audio data, which is stored
in a compressed WAV file. However, this option is closedsource and may require additional payment. Gorilla also
may be more complex than many researchers may need in
terms of their provided options. This could require a time
investment from the researcher to familiarize themselves
with what may be an unfamiliar experiment platform.
Another recent technological advancement for collecting voice data is via PsychoJS. PsychoJS is an open-source
way for researchers to present participants with stimuli and
recorded verbal responses online. This technology also
utilizes compressed WAV files to avoid issues with large
file sizes. While PsychoJS is a great option for researchers looking to implement experimental designs using
voice protocol in an inexpensive and efficient way, it does
require coding knowledge (PsychoJS, 2021). This may be
an issue to many researchers with behavioral science backgrounds, who do not typically get training or frequently
use coding languages to collect data from experiments.
Phonic Inc. also provides researchers with a survey
platform designed around voice recording and video
(Phonic, 2019). Along with their available survey platform, Phonic Inc. makes available Phonic.ai. Phonic.ai is
a more widget-based vocal recording option and allows
for the collection of audio data from outside sources or
platforms. The stand-alone survey platform option is
the most user-friendly option from Phonic Inc., but does
require that an entirely new survey be created to use vocal
recording. Phonic.ai allows for integration with outside
survey platform options but does require that researchers pay to utilize these features, and cost can be a large
factor for those without funding options. While Phonic.
ai is a viable option for many researchers for integrating vocal recording with existing surveys, there is limited
information on how to integrate HTML code provided
with those platforms, and there is a paywall to access the
full functionality for Phonic.ai. Additionally, there is not
much information available on how researchers handle and

access the recorded date, which can be confusing to those
new to using vocal protocols.
One option for online vocal recording is through addpi​
pe.​com, offered as their product, Pipe Audio and Video
Recorder (Pipe Services S.R.L., 2015). This vocal recording
option is useful for those looking to integrate vocal recording across multiple devices and operating systems. The Pipe
Audio and Video Recorder uses an HTML5 audio and video
recorder that is built mainly for developers. While this could
enable the product to be integrated with many existing surveys on different platforms, it requires extensive coding and
web development knowledge. It would also require researchers to sign up and pay for a subscription to access a secure
server in order to save the recorded audio data and ensure
participant data is safe.
Finally, there are several options for more experimentalbased online vocal protocols. Some of these include: PsychoPy’s Pavlovia, PsyToolkit, and OpenSesame’s OSWeb
extension that can publish online experiments through
JATOS (OSWeb, 2020; PsychoPy., 2018; PsyToolkit,
2022). These options are successfully and commonly used
for experimental psychology applications. This does pose
issues for researchers unfamiliar with using more experimental-based applications to record vocal data. Specifically,
all the previously mentioned options are separate study platforms that would require researchers to build their study
from scratch on the platform in order to record participants’
voices. This would not enable the full integration of vocal
recording into any existing survey platforms the researcher
may be more comfortable using or already pay a subscription
to. Overall, many of these more updated and online-based
methods of voice data collection solve some of the issues
with older methods, but they present their own limitations.

Constructs captured by voice data and their
applications
Tasks using verbal protocol methods can measure many
different cognitive constructs, including (1) effort during a
task through pauses in verbal protocol or verbalized effort,
(2) common errors or deficits in thinking while completing
a task, and (3) improvements in thinking processes documented across tasks as a participant learns (Kasper, 1998;
Zainal Abidin et al., 2009). The ability to measure a wide
variety of constructs allows for verbal protocol methods to
be effectively used across many different fields and in conjunction with many different tasks. Below we describe how
different psychological and other fields examine these broad
constructs using voice data.
Human factors studies examine how humans interact and
use products or computers in their environment, in an effort
to make that process as efficient and ergonomic as possible. Human factors testing uses psychological concepts and

13

Behavior Research Methods

integrates those with how people interact with their current
environment. A verbal protocol facilitates human factors
research by offering insight into a participant’s immediate
experience with a product’s design as they interact with it.
This insight allows human factors researchers to find flaws
or means of improvement with a specific product of interest
(Deffner et al., 1990). More recently, software engineering
research incorporates verbal protocol methods to analyze the
difference between expert and novice problem-solving on
software comprehension and programming tasks (Hughes
& Parkes, 2003). In a more niche application, environmental
regulation efforts utilize verbal protocols to understand the
value of conservation efforts at various costs in willingnessto-pay tasks. This allows environmental researchers to better
implement effective interventions (Schkade & Payne, 1994).
Industrial/organizational psychologists explore managers’
problem-solving processes during high-risk organizational
decision-making, using a verbal protocol design during work
sample tasks (Isenberg, 1986). A verbal protocol can also
be used in industrial/organizational psychology to review
structured and unstructured interviews as they are given to
an applicant. Industrial/organizational psychologists implement a verbal protocol in conjunction with EMA methods
in order to prompt individuals to elaborate on what they are
experiencing at a specific moment during the workday. EMA
and verbal protocols have also been used together across
medical fields to document instances of addictive or harmful
behaviors and corresponding thought processes as they happen (Litt et al., 1998). Industrial/Organizational psychology,
in addition to various other fields, uses verbal protocols as
a more participant-friendly way to collect diary data. This
allows participants to speak out loud and record their diary
entries rather than write, which may take more effort for a
participant (Gouveia & Karapanos, 2013).
The diverse usage of verbal protocol methods allows for
its further implementation in a variety of fields outside of
human factors and Industrial/Organizational psychology.
For example, a verbal protocol is used to study how architects collaborate and go about completing design projects,
allowing researchers to gain insight into the creative process
(Zainal Abidin et al., 2009). Researchers also implement a
think-aloud protocol within different fields of engineering.
Specifically, using student participants during their studying of course material and working on design projects. By
having these students describe their thought processes, it
is possible to take a more in-depth look at how products,
systems, or interventions are designed and conceptualized
by electrical, mechanical, biomedical, environmental, civil,
and industrial engineers (Atman & Bursic, 1998). In more
humanistic-based fields, nursing and special education
teaching both utilize aspects of verbal protocol methods in
order to gain insight into a variety of constructs. The nursing
field uses a think-aloud process while participant nurses care

13

for patients, allowing researchers to differentiate between
experts’ and novice nurses’ thought processes during patient
care (Hoffman et al., 2009). These differences in thought
processes enable researchers to then understand how expert
vs novice nurses make decisions differently which can better assist in the training development of newly hired nurses.
Researchers focused on special education teachers utilize
voice protocol methods to provide immediate feedback to
novice teachers after think-aloud tasks or during lessons
with students (Goodman et al., 2008). These voice recordings of special education teachers can also be collected for
analysis by researchers post think-aloud protocols.
The broad range of fields and uses of vocal protocol collection emphasizes the variety of constructs of interest in
vocal data. Many of these constructs collected by more traditional methods may actually be best collected by these more
dated methods and not more updated means of vocal protocol collection. However, traditional methods do still limit
researchers in their accessibility of vocal data collection.
That is, many of the constructs reviewed may be difficult for
researchers to access collection means without specialized
equipment, resources, or training.

Analysis of voice data
After collecting voice recordings, researchers have a variety
of options to quantify the unstructured data into constructs of
interest. Commonly, researchers examine the content of the
words spoken. Examples of content analysis include counting specific words or phrases, or examining how closely a
participant’s narrative matches a particular “thought pattern”
that the researcher defines ahead of time (Chi, 1997). In
addition to coding the spoken words, researchers can analyze the waveform of the recording to extract psychological
relevant variables. One method of extracting meaning from
vocal data is examining specific vocal indicators. Vocal indicators can be anything from tone, prosody, pitch, disfluencies, or pauses (Sondhi et al., 2015). Researchers can also
calculate aggregate/composite variables from these vocal
indicators to represent higher-level features (e.g., formants
F1 and F2; Sondhi et al., 2015). These analytic methods
illustrate the diverse range of options available to quantify
verbal data, highlighting its potential to provide distinctive
insights from traditional scale-based approaches.

Limitations of voice data collection
While vocal protocol methods can provide a source of rich
data not easily accessed by other methods, there can be several limitations in its practical use. One limitation is implementing the vocal protocol method. Typically, participants

Behavior Research Methods

have to physically enter a lab setting supervised by researchers (Krahmer & Ummelen, 2004). This increased effort in
data collection can potentially discourage participants from
committing to being physically present for a study and thus
can generate smaller sample sizes. Therefore, requiring participants to travel to a laboratory for voice data collection
minimizes the study’s scalability, increasing the difficulty
of obtaining large sample sizes via current verbal protocol
methods.
Additionally, verbal protocol methods can also be problematic for researchers because each lab study would need
trained research assistants who are able to supervise and
direct participants to record their voice data (Crutcher,
1994). This would mean that more people would need to be
hired or involved in the lab, which can bring about a whole
additional effort to increase lab personnel. All lab-based
studies have this resource limitation, and psychological
researchers are increasingly moving towards scalable online
data collection, besides for vocal data collection.
In order to gain increased diversity and size in research
samples, studies today tend to use online surveys. This is
typically done through survey collection platforms such
as Amazon’s MTurk and Qualtrics (Brandon et al., 2014).
These platforms provide a ready-to-use outlet for researchers
to collect data outside of a laboratory setting. While these
collection platforms offer a useful and scalable alternative
to in-lab studies, there are some notable drawbacks. These
limitations then lead researchers to sometimes opt for in-lab
studies despite the own unique limitations of those methods
as well.

Currently available solutions for collecting
voice protocols online
Not much leeway has been made in addressing limitations of
prior verbal protocol methods. This can be attributed to the
risk in losing some of the richness in data provided beyond
other observational methods. However, some improvements
have been made in terms of better facilitating the richness
of voice data. As technology of audio devices prospers,
researchers benefit from these higher quality recording
devices when collecting verbal data (Trickett & Trafton,
2009). The extra cost in using state-of-the-art recording
technology is argued to be counteracted by additional data
potentially provided. Better microphones or quality recording devices may pick up on small utterances of words, whispered words during thought, or even sighs or other nonlanguage-based vocal indicators (Trickett & Trafton, 2009).
Other developments in verbal protocol methods have
been in the realm of data analysis and not the collection
method. Typical coding of verbal data requires counts of
specific words, phrases, or the order they come in. This

is expanded on in attempts to recreate a mental model of
thought through the coding of verbal protocol data (Zainal
Abidin et al., 2009). This change in coding scheme allows
researchers to try to generate a more comprehensive picture
of the thought process enacted by participants. This coding
scheme, however, is less universal and is best used in case
study situations with researchers more familiar and trained
on the protocol, because of its labor-intensive interpretations. Additionally, the vocal data are usually coupled with
other methodologies such as behavioral observations or
physiological measures. This integration of different sources
of data requires considerable researcher effort that may not
be matched with an increase in data richness. Researchers
are relatively unaware of the limitations for collecting nontraditional data in online settings. Some recent developments
include collecting mouse tracking data, but there is not yet
a formal way to collect audio data easily in the same developed manner (Mathur & Reichling, 2019).
Currently available options to collect vocal data in
conjunction with online surveys include integrating vocal
protocol recording with a recording tape and microphone
headset in-lab with survey data collection on a computer in
front of the participant. During this vocal data collection,
the participant will take the survey using a think-aloud protocol and describe their thought process while completing
the survey (Wirth et al., 2000). The EAR device can also
be combined with online survey data collection on survey
platforms which will have a similar implementation as other
recording devices but can be used during at-home verbal
data collection (Mehl et al., 2001). VoIP is also available for
researchers to combine with survey platform data collection
but because it is a stand-alone Internet application, it must
be opened in a separate window from the survey (Goode,
2002). In Keromytis (2009), options and usage guidance for
VoIP are provided in the form of a road map for researchers
to fully understand the capabilities of the system and how to
use it in conjunction with an online survey. However, there
is currently no survey platform that provides any means of
voice recording or collecting vocal data within the survey
itself, or as the participant completes the survey online. This
lack of integration limits researchers using verbal protocol
data in their ability to collect larger and more diverse datasets as well as to utilize online survey platform capabilities.

Proposed method
In order to provide an option not previously offered in
the means of collecting vocal data, we propose VOIS
(Voice Over Internet Surveys), a user-friendly method
of collecting audio data by offering code that is compatible with common survey collection systems, and a way
to convert the recorded data into audio files. VOIS can

13

Behavior Research Methods

then enable researchers who utilize online survey platforms to supplement their data collection methodology
with vocal recording. This can be in the form of adding
vocal recording to an existing survey, implementing VOIS
with other question types available in survey platforms,
or even creating a survey entirely around the collection of
vocal data. Some of the reviewed existing methods for collecting vocal data provide unique contributions, regardless
of their discussed limitations, beyond what is offered by
VOIS. However, VOIS is structured to provide researchers
with an opportunity not yet available for combining online
survey platforms with the ability to collect vocal data from
participants and potentially even expand on the constructs
currently collected by more traditional methods.
The intended application of the proposed method is twofold: (1) VOIS functions to break down barriers preventing
many researchers from conducting voice protocol studies
online, and therefore VOIS would be applied to research
that needs the voice protocol design. (2) VOIS also opens up
new possibilities for conducting voice protocol. This would
allow VOIS to be applied to studies that are not exclusively
voice protocol studies, but that could be enhanced by implementing VOIS to address potential research issues. While
researchers may find numerous ways to utilize VOIS in their
studies, the proposed method is useful for researchers who
are looking for a simple way to collect voice data.
The first intended application of VOIS for vocal data
collection is to assist researchers who may face barriers
to collecting vocal data in more traditional methods or in
the currently available online methods. These barriers can
include the inability to access a lab space or more complex
and involved tools that require time to learn how to properly
use for vocal data collection. Without already having access
to tools or equipment, researchers can also encounter barriers in the form of high costs involved in acquiring those
resources. Other barriers could be associated with the currently available online methods used in place of more traditional in-lab methods. These include researchers possibly
not having the funding for closed-source implementations
for voice data collection, as well as a lack of researcher programming knowledge or background for some of the opensource options available. Thus, our proposed method circumvents these barriers, making the collection of voice data
more accessible to researchers and even creating a possibility for researchers with experience in collecting alternative
sources of data to explore supplemental uses of vocal data
in an approachable way. We anticipate that this accessibility
can be helpful specifically to researchers who may already
be familiar with existing survey software and are looking for
an approachable means to include voice recording in their
research. This inclusion could be in several forms, such as

13

researchers adding vocal recording components to existing
surveys as supplemental data collection.
In addition to breaking down barriers for vocal data collection, we intend VOIS to be useful to researchers looking
to trial vocal recording in order to design new studies around
this form of data collection or in addition to their currently
used forms of data. Additionally, VOIS can be implemented
within an experimental design on any survey software that
a researcher may be most comfortable using. The availability of an option for vocal data collection that integrates
with currently available survey platforms, unlike existing
methods, can assist researchers in designing a study around
their specific needs and available tools. Therefore, VOIS can
allow researchers to improve upon potential research issues
including a new way to verify that participants understood
the study and that the responses have not been fabricated by
third parties. VOIS can also replace more traditional survey
response methods such as text input to reduce participant
survey time and fatigue. Additionally, VOIS can address
issues in measuring constructs in potentially more meaningful ways by capturing details related to vocal recording
as opposed to self-report.
While VOIS may not be feasible as a substitute for every
construct collected or every study design used via more traditional or in-lab methods, it can help bridge a gap in the
benefits offered by both in-lab and online methods currently
available. Thus, VOIS offers a risk-free way for researchers
to trial vocal recording in their current and future studies.
In providing a more user-friendly and accessible option that
is not currently compatible with online survey methodology, we hope researchers can find an easy way to collect
constructs of interest in their research.
Specifically, VOIS implements a vocal data collection via a copy-and-paste script that is compatible with
any survey system that allows HTML code. This includes
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk), Qualtrics, and selfhosted websites, as well as many others. This copy-andpaste approach is beneficial by not being tied to a specific
platform and requiring no previous coding knowledge
when implementing the method on third-party websites.
Additionally, with the prevalence of online studies use in
published academic articles as shown in Table 1, being
compatible with even just MTurk covers a lot of online data
collection landscape.
The VOIS method allows the researcher to copy and paste
code into their survey, distribute the survey, obtain the audio
data recorded within the main survey, and then upload it to
the researcher’s private server. This method is also compatible with every major operating system (Windows, Mac,
Linux, Android, iOS), and most major browsers (Chrome,
Firefox, Safari, Edge).

Behavior Research Methods
Table 1  Prevalence of online methods in social and applied journals
Journal

Year

No. of online studies No. of MTurk studies Total no. of studies

% of online studies

% of
MTurk
studies

JPSP

2019–2020
2014–2015
2009–2010
2019–2020
2014–2015
2009–2010
2019–2020
2014–2015
2009–2010

363
233
123
73
73
40
70
77
13

0.68
0.55
0.26
0.60
0.41
0.32
0.53
0.51
0.13

0.41
0.32
0.01
0.23
0.05
0.00
0.44
0.25
0.00

JAP

JCP

216
137
6
28
9
0
58
38
0

533
427
481
122
176
124
131
151
97

Journals examined were the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology (JPSP; ­NArticles2019–2020 = 128, ­NStudies2019–2020 = 533, ­NArticles2014–2015
= 117, ­NStudies2014–2015 = 427, ­NArticles2009–2010 = 144, ­NStudies2009–2010 = 481), the Journal of Applied Psychology (JAP; ­NArticles2019–2020 = 76,
­NStudies2019–2020 = 122, ­NArticles2014–2010 = 123, ­NStudies2014–2015 = 176, ­NArticles2009–2010 = 97, ­NStudies2009–2010 = 124), and the Journal of Consumer
Psychology (JCP; ­NArticles2019–2020 = 36, ­NStudies2019–2020 = 131, ­NArticles2014–2015 = 48, ­NStudies2014–2015 = 151, ­NArticles2009–2010 = 50, ­NStudies2009–2010
= 97)

Overview of the proposed method
The proposed method is collected in a JavaScript file that
the researcher links to in their survey. HTML-based surveys
allow linking outside JavaScript files using the <script>
tag. Within the script tag is a direct link to the VOIS JavaScript file, which handles the processing of the audio and
sending of the data to the researcher’s storage. The VOIS
JavaScript file uses the WebKit AudioContext feature found
in major browsers (e.g., Chrome, Firefox, Safari, and Edge,
as well as Android and iOS browsers)1. The AudioContext feature can receive data from the participant’s microphone. This data is processed by the script into a 44,100 Hz
24-bit “WAV” formatted file, by processing the streaming
data into chunks and converting the input into bytes. The
WAV audio processing code incorporates elements from
the JavaScript WZRecorder library, which is based on the
Recorderjs library (Diamond, 2016; Dugger, 2018). By having the linked script perform the major computations and
processing, the researcher then simply needs to paste the
visual elements in their survey.
WAV files are uncompressed and so their file size can be
large and taxing on bandwidth requirements for participants
(~ 5 MB per minute). To make the method more compatible
for users with limited data, at the expend of audio fidelity,
we also have a version of the VOIS script that saves the
audio in 160 kbps MP3 files (~1 MB per minute). The MP3
processing code incorporates elements from the WebAudioRecorder-js (Miyane, 2016) library to process the encoding

1

https://​devel​oper.​mozil​la.​org/​en-​US/​docs/​Web/​API/​Audio​Conte​xt.

of captured audio into an MP3 file that is then uploaded to
the researcher’s FTP server.
In addition to linking the VOIS JavaScript file, the
researcher pastes seven lines of code (provided in the
“Implementation Section”) that are responsible for the
visual appearance of the voice protocol prompt. The code
the researcher posts simply contains (1) the question text,
(2) the recording button, (3) the time elapsed, (4) the audio
player to hear the recorded clip, (5) the status of the transfer of the voice recording to the researcher’s server, (6) a
data field to temporarily hold the recording data, and (7)
a data field to hold the researcher’s access token. When
pasted into the survey, the participant can see the instructions, click a record button, press the same button to stop
the recording, and have the data sent to the researcher automatically. The data can be re-recorded by the participant
and re-sent to the researcher if needed. The file sent to the
researcher contains the participant’s IP address to be able
to match the recordings with the rest of that participant’s
responses. To protect participant privacy, the IP addresses
are encoded using a SHA-256 hash of the participant’s
IP address and the researcher’s access token. SHA-256
encryption is performed by the crypto-js library (Vosberg,
2021). A researcher can encode their collected IP addresses
from the survey using the following site:
https://​psych.​x10ho​st.​com/​audio/​encod​eipad​dress.​html
The screenshot below shows how users, after collecting
survey data from a platform where the answers are identified
by the original IP address, can enter (1) their VOIS access
token, and the IP addresses from the survey platform. The
site then shows how the IP addresses will be encoded, which
can then be matched to the files saved in the researcher’s
FTP server.

13

Behavior Research Methods

If a researcher does not wish to encode the IP address
within the filenames that VOIS saves, they can simply deselect that option when initially generating their access token.

Benefits of using the proposed online voice protocol
method versus lab‑based options
Increased sample size
Our proposed alternative method of verbal protocol, as
accessed via a common web-based survey platform, provides many benefits beyond how verbal protocols are currently used. One major benefit of VOIS above current verbal protocol methodology is the access to larger and more
diverse participant samples than an in-lab setting, while still
maintaining richness of data. The proposed method of online
survey platform usage is especially relevant for researchers not affiliated with larger universities or institutions and
lack access to the large populations those entities provide
(Brandon et al., 2014). More independent researchers can
then gain access to an otherwise unreachable population. By
utilizing third-party survey methods, researchers can easily
access data from a wider range of locations as well.
While the default may be for participants to complete
online surveys on their laptops or desktops, many computers currently have integrated microphones that allow participants to easily take surveys with VOIS items included.

13

Also, in a now post-COVID-19 world, many computers are
equipped with quality webcams and integrated microphones
that participants are probably familiar with and comfortable using. The availability of this equipment indicates that
VOIS can serve as a transition to new possibilities not as
normalized or available prior to the pandemic. While participants can utilize computers to complete online surveys
with VOIS, cell phone compatibility of most third-party
surveys provides participants with a more efficient experience when recording vocal data. Participants who find it
easier to complete the survey and provide data will be more
inclined to do so, leading to more completed surveys and
thus, more data.
Decreased researcher effort
Our method of collecting verbal data can also work with
existing frameworks of online survey collection platforms
to not only generate larger samples, but to also reduce
researcher effort in doing so. The researcher would simply
have to design the task or survey around the means for verbal
data collection and implement it into their desired survey
platform. Because VOIS is a copy-and-paste implementation, it is simple to add to an existing survey or task. Therefore, researcher effort can be reduced in terms of time spent
in the lab and utilization of research assistants because of
the online implementation of VOIS.

Behavior Research Methods

Increased generalizability of samples
Some other benefits of VOIS deal with the scalability of
the data collection effort. Not only can larger samples be
accessed with less research effort, VOIS also allows for
remote collection. Because of the ability to access most
web-based survey platforms on the phone or computer,
every participant can record voice data from a more remote
or comfortable locale. Because participants may be more
comfortable recording vocal data in a private setting, this
may potentially allow for richer content of the data so as to
avoid lab effects.
Another benefit of being able to use verbal protocols in a
web-based survey design is the ability to sample across large
distances. Many survey platforms can be wide-reaching and
access many different locations. This allows not only for a
more diverse sample but also a larger sample that will, in
turn, be more generalizable. While survey platforms may
not provide an optimal solution for researchers who aim
to recruit specific target populations, it is still possible to
create advertisements, descriptions, or screening questions
that ask for participation only from those meeting certain
requirements or qualifications. Seeing that many surveys and
studies posted on survey platforms such as MTurk can reach
diverse and large populations that receive many views, they
have the potential to include views from certain populations
of interest.
Decreased participant effort
Another important benefit of web-based verbal protocol
methodology via online survey platform integration is the
decrease in participant effort. There may be some initial
hesitation from participants to interface with VOIS as a
response option when it comes to recording themselves due
to the uncommon nature of the task and the perception of
decreased anonymity. However, this limitation may be more
of a concern with some of the more traditional methods of
in-lab vocal data collection, where vocal recording is done
as a stand-alone method. It is possible that over time, having
participants record their voices as part of a survey response
will become more natural and raise less concern related to
participant reidentification or loss of anonymity. Additionally, with the ease of using a cell phone as a means for participants to complete surveys and thus record their voices
using the VOIS integration, participants may actually find
this easier than typing in a response. Because cell phone
usage is part vocal, participants may find that less effort is
required when completing a survey on their phone that uses
VOIS, especially if they already have their phone with them
and are used to talking into it.
The alternative to generalizing verbal data to a webbased design is having participants type, which may not

provide the same richness in data and may be more labor
intensive, especially on a cell phone. Web-based surveys
are easily accessible via cell phone or personal computer
and thus, VOIS will be as well. This allows for integration
with existing equipment that participants already have and
doesn’t require any specialized hardware such as badges or
sensors, like some verbal protocol studies. To the same point
as avoiding a lab-based study, not only will researchers not
have to be present in the lab, but participants can provide
vocal data from home using VOIS’s implementation.
Simple verification of respondent participation
Voice data collection serves a simple, yet extremely effective countermeasure against data fabrication. Recording audio
during an in person study conducted by a research assistant
can provide many benefits (Gomila et al., 2017; Harrison
& Krauss, 2002). The issue of data fabrication has become
increasingly concerning, as research assistants or surveyors may submit data that was not in fact collected, but rather
completely or partially created for efficiency or incentive reasons. Recording the participant and surveyor's voice can be
helpful for verifying that both individuals are following the
study's protocol. Having all respondents record their audio,
even briefly, can also be used to promote data integrity, by
making it more difficult for research assistants or surveyors to
fabricate data across many respondents, a phenomenon known
as “curbstoning” (for a review see Hernandez et al., 2022).
Prevalence of online psychology studies
In addition to the abovementioned benefits, the overwhelming move in psychological research, especially within universities, to utilizing survey platforms for data collections
lays a strong foundation for the adoption of the proposed
method. Even despite the current incompatibility with the
collection of vocal data, psychological researchers frequently reap the benefits of online survey platforms for data
collection in a variety of academic studies. Because of the
ability to collect convenience samples, which are becoming increasingly relevant and necessary for generalization
in social sciences, online survey platforms are now more
mainstream than ever in psychological research (Boas et al.,
2018). This prior know-how that many researchers have of
generating and catering surveys to their research via survey
platforms makes them especially user-friendly when implementing new protocol options.
A survey of 750 university human research ethics committees (HRECs) in the United States also revealed that
Internet research in general, involving online or web surveys, is the type of methodology most often reviewed (94%
of respondents) in submitted studies (Buchanan & Hvizdak,
2009). This indicates the growing prevalence of online

13

Behavior Research Methods

survey methods in academic research. Not only is this prevalence found with all academic research in universities, but it
is specifically prevalent in social science fields and related
research as a whole (Van Selm & Jankowski, 2006).
While social science, psychology, and applied researchers
seem more likely to use online survey-based platforms via
the Internet, there is an apparent increasing trend in studies
adopting this methodology. Today, survey software packages
and online surveys services make online survey research
much easier and faster (Wright, 2005). With this ease of
use, online survey companies are continuously updating and
revising their services to offer more up-to-date and userfriendly platforms. This demonstrates the increased desirability and subsequent adoption of these services, especially
in social, psychological, and applied research. In the same
survey study by Buchanan and Hvizdak (2009), the overwhelming majority (94%) of respondents to the survey stated
that online survey research was the main type of Internet
research reviewed. Those respondents of 750 university
HRECs also indicated that they were typically reviewing 0–5
Internet-related research protocols per month. Of the online
surveys reviewed, nearly all fell into the exempt category of
review, indicating that the nature of the data was not overly
sensitive, nor were the data from vulnerable populations
being surveyed.
However, many of these studies that analyze trends in
online survey usage, especially within psychological fields,
are relatively dated. The sheer number of the studies published in social, psychological, and applied journals each
year nearly requires a yearly update to appropriately reflect
the trends in online methodology. To address this issue and
illustrate exactly how prevalent online study methods are
in published research, we examined every article published
in the previous year (September 2019–September 2020), 5
years ago (September 2014–September 2015), and 10 years
ago (September 2009–September 2010) from three journals that study social, psychological, and applied fields: the
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology (JPSP), the
Journal of Applied Psychology (JAP), and the Journal of
Consumer Psychology (JCP). In total we coded 389 JPSP
articles, 296 JAP articles, and 134 JCP articles. We coded
each study within an article for whether it utilized online
study methodologies as stated in the methods section. This
analysis coded a total number of 2242 studies (NJPSP =
1441, NJAP = 422, NJCP = 379). We summarize the results
of this review in Table 1. Based on these analyses, we find
that online study methods are increasingly more common
over time in popular social and applied psychological journals. Additionally, all studies analyzed in the last year reflect
that at least 50% of the studies use online study methods.
While it is relevant to demonstrate the prevalence of
online studies in major psychological journal articles, it is
even more relevant to the proposed method to demonstrate

13

those studies that use online survey platforms. Specifically, it
is common for researchers in psychological and related fields
to access large and diverse populations on Amazon’s MTurk
online survey platform. With its low cost, high recruitment
speed, pretesting availability, and both exploratory and current event research designs, MTurk is a popular choice in
academic research for advanced online survey design platforms (Boas et al., 2018). In a literature search within 20
top Industrial/Organizational psychology journals using
the search terms “Mechanical Turk” and “MTurk”, Cheung
et al. (2017) shows that 99 empirical papers out of all the
papers within those journals from the year 2016 used at least
one MTurk sample. Additionally, there is a steady increase
in papers using MTurk samples since 2012, as shown by
the same study. Another study looking at response rates
for online survey platforms shows that MTurk collected a
sample that consisted of 581 US respondents for a study
that included a posting of a task examining the relationship between job fit and employee attitudes (Kraiger et al.,
2019). Although the most recent source showing the frequency of MTurk use is from 2019, we updated the estimated prevalence of MTurk methods among popular social
and applied psychological journals, similar to as discussed
above. Again, we examined every article published in the
previous year (September 2019–September 2020), 5 years
ago (September 2014–September 2015), and 10 years ago
(September 2009–September 2010) from three journals that
study social, psychological, and applied fields: JPSP, JAP,
and JCP. In total we coded 389 JPSP articles, 296 JAP articles, and 134 JCP articles. This time, we coded each study
within an article for whether it utilized MTurk as a means
for collecting study data, as stated in the methods section.
This analysis coded a total number of 2242 studies (NJPSP
= 1441, NJAP = 422, NJCP = 379). We summarize the
results of this review in Table 1. Based on these analyses, the
prevalence of studies that use MTurk as a means for online
data collection only increases over time in the popular social
and applied psychological journals analyzed. These analyses
also demonstrate that MTurk is used at least 23% of the time
and up to 44% in the total number of most recent studies
assessed. Due to the usage of online studies, specifically
via MTurk services in published studies becoming increasingly more common, our implementation focuses mainly on
MTurk and self-hosted websites.
Despite the growing prevalence of online studies,
researchers still currently struggle to apply verbal protocol
methodology to more modern options for generalizable data
collection, such as survey collection platforms. These collection platforms are typically accessed via the Internet as
open-source third-party survey implementations. Survey
collection platforms allow researchers to input survey questions that participants view in a sequential fashion. Using
these platforms, researchers can further control the survey’s

Behavior Research Methods

design by altering the underlying HTML and JavaScript
code, if they so desire. Third-party survey platforms also
allow participants to access the survey via cell phone, as a
more efficient and user-friendly means to survey completion.
Many of these collection platforms allow for large sample
sizes because of their accessibility and simplicity for both
the researcher and participants (Boas et al., 2018).
While third-party collection platforms offer a scalable
alternative to in-lab studies, there are some notable drawbacks. These platforms can only utilize written survey
designs and provide no way to integrate vocal protocol collection methods or anything besides survey answers as data.
This limits the types of studies in which larger and more
diverse sample sizes can be readily accessed. The above
limitation is a pervasive problem for researchers using vocal
protocol collection methods. These researchers are then left
out of the trend of increasing online survey platform adoption and remain left to collect vocal data in a laboratory
setting. The proposed method aims to address the limitations of currently available in-lab and online methods of
collecting voice data by providing an open-source option
for researchers to include a means to collect voice data in a
survey platform.

Implementing the proposed method
The proposed method can be implemented across a variety
of survey platforms. However, those platforms must meet
the requirement that they allow researchers to supply their
own HTML code within the survey. Given the importance
of customizing the appearance of one’s survey and the fundamental nature of HTML to all webpages, we believe it
is unlikely that this aspect will ever be removed from any
major platform. By offering a method that works on major
survey platforms such as MTurk and Qualtrics, as well as
self-hosted websites, we hope to enable a variety of uses
and applications for researchers to facilitate in vocal data
collection online.
Obtain File Transfer Protocol credentials
Voice recording data requires more file storage than standard
plain-text data. Therefore, researchers seeking to implement
the voice protocol method remotely need a cloud-based storage option for saving their collected data. The most prevalent
Internet standard for uploading data to servers remotely is
the File Transfer Protocol (FTP). FTP is a standard communication protocol that anyone can use to transfer their
computer files to a server. FTP users authenticate themselves
with a username and password and offers secure transmission that protects the username and password, and encrypts
the content. Unlike other cloud storage options like Google

Drive or Dropbox, it is not tied to a particular company, and
is not subject to change by a single entity as it is a designated
“Internet Standard” first published in 1971 as a Request for
Comments, published by the Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), which decides on global Internet protocols.
Researchers may already have access to FTP-accessible
storage via their university. If researchers are not given
storage by their university, FTP-compatible storage can be
purchased for typically less than $10 monthly from a web
hosting service. A web hosting service allows individuals to make their website accessible via the World Wide
Web. Web. These companies provide space on a server to
be leased by clients. Typically, web hosting services offer
free FTP access to their clients because it provides a simple,
universal way to transfer large files.
The proposed method requires the researcher to have the
FTP credentials available to save files to their hosting service. The required FTP credentials are (1) the FTP domain,
typically ftp.​domain.​com, (2) the username, and (3) the password. These are provided by the hosting service in their FTP
instructions. When the researcher knows these credentials,
they can create an access token, which will inform the VOIS
software where to save the voice data without exposing the
researcher’s FTP information to the survey participants.
Creating an access token
Before implementing the VOIS protocol, researchers should
create an access token, which will inform the system where
to save the recorded voice files. The access token is linked
to one’s FTP account on a hosting domain. When a user
provides the access token in the collection code, the system
will use the associated credential to save the data. Therefore,
the temporary voice file created by a user is sent directly to
their hosting server, and no voice data is stored elsewhere.
To create an access token, a researcher simply goes to the
token generation website in their web browser (https://​psych.​
x10ho​st.​com/​audio/​gener​ateto​ken.​html). They then enter their
FTP server URL, their FTP username, and their FTP password (Fig. 1). Optionally, researchers can indicate a subdirectory if they are not able to save to the main folder or have
another preferred saving destination. If a researcher desires to
save in the main directory, then they can leave the subdirectory blank. The researcher also selects whether they want to
encrypt the respondent’s IP address so that the raw IP address
is not saved in the filename. To match IP addresses from a
survey to the filenames saved by VOIS, the researcher needs
to encrypt the survey IP addresses using the following site:
https://​psych.​x10ho​st.​com/​audio/​encod​eipad​dress.​html
After entering the information, the researcher clicks the
“Generate Token” button, and the unique access token is created. The access token is a string of 30 randomly generated
numbers and letters. With 26 possible letters and 10 possible

13

Behavior Research Methods

Fig. 1  Testing an access token associated with a researcher’s FTP credentials

digits, there are ­3630 = forty-eight quattuordecillion eight
hundred seventy-three tredecillion six hundred seventyeight duodecillion possible combinations. Therefore, brute
force guessing or accidentally using another person’s token
is extremely unlikely. This token is pasted into the provided
code in the following sections. If a researcher provides invalid FTP credentials, the website will inform them to correct
the information and try again.

“Test Your Access Token” button to send the voice recording to the FTP server associated with that token. Researchers are then instructed to check on their server to verify
that the new file is there. The filename contains two parts:
a string equivalent to the researcher’s IP address and “_testquestion.wav”. After verifying that the file is saved in the
FTP server, the researcher is ready to collect voice data
online (Fig. 2 right panel).

Verifying the access token

Collecting voice data

After receiving an access token, researchers may want to
verify that they can save voice recordings to their FTP
storage. We provide a website where a researcher can test
VOIS, and see the resulting sound file saved in their storage (https://​p sych.​x 10ho​s t.​c om/​a udio/​t estt​o ken.​h tml).
Researchers visit the testing site after receiving their token.
They then paste their access token in the input field. They
can then record an audio clip using their computer (Fig. 2
left panel). After recording the audio clip, they click on the

Collecting a single recording To collect voice data, researchers simply need to paste the following code in their survey’s HTML editor. The researcher must replace the text
that says, “ACCESS-TOKEN-GOES-HERE” with their
own access token that they received from the first step. The
researcher would also change “Voice Protocol Question 1
Text Goes Here” with their own prompt for the participants.
In the following paragraph, each of the eight lines of code is
described in further detail in terms of its purpose.

Fig. 2  The panel on the left shows the web page where researchers
can paste their access token and record an audio clip to verify that
voice recordings are correctly saved to their FTP storage. The panel

on the right shows the web page where researchers are then prompted
to check their server for their recorded test audio file

13

Behavior Research Methods

appropriate server. The line should go at the very end of the
survey. If there are multiple verbal prompts, then it should
only be used once, after the final prompt.
In the above code, the first line displays the question
text or prompt to the participant. This prompt would be
an instruction of what to record, such as the participants’
thought process during a problem or a summary of one’s
experience. The second line displays a button that the participant clicks to begin the recording process. After clicking it, it changes into a “Stop recording” button, which the
participant clicks to stop the program from recording any
more audio. The third line displays how many milliseconds
have elapsed since the beginning of the record. Researchers
may desire to impose a suggested minimum or maximum
length of response, and this duration feature can provide
participants with the information needed to adhere to those
guidelines. The fourth line displays an audio player so that
the participant can listen to their recording after they press
the “Stop Recording” button. The fifth line confirms to the
participant whether they have recorded any audio. After
pressing the “Stop recording” button, the status changes to
“Uploading recording.” After the recording finishes uploading to the researcher’s FTP server, the status changes to
“Audio Upload Complete.” The sixth line is a hidden input
that is not visible to the participant. It stores the audio data
temporarily while it is being uploaded to the researcher’s
FTP server. The seventh line contains the researcher’s access
token information. This information is stored in a hidden
field and is accessed by the VOIS software when uploading the audio data. The eighth line contains a link to the
script that processes the recorded data and uploads it to the

Collecting multiple recordings If the researcher wants
to collect multiple voice prompts, then the above code is
simply copy–pasted multiple times in the survey, changing
the number “1” to the number “2” in lines 2–6. That is,
when the code indicates: id = “record1”, the code should be
changed to id= “record2” When the code says, id= “duration1”, the code should be changed to id = “duration2”.
In total, six instances should be altered when creating a
new question. Researchers can create up to 1000 questions
using VOIS. As mentioned in the previous section, if using
multiple questions, then line 8, containing the link to the
vois.js script, should only appear once in the code, after the
last question.

Example 1: Collecting voice data on MTurk
MTurk, the popular survey collection platform, creates surveys primarily via HTML elements. Therefore, researchers
can paste the code provided above into its HTML editor, and
simply need to change the access token to their own (Fig. 3).
Researchers using MTurk should create a blank survey. Then
in the “Design Layout” view, paste the code between the
“crowd-form” tags. MTurk allows the researcher to preview
the survey to verify the appearance (Fig. 4). When the code
is pasted, the study will save the collected audio data to the
researcher’s FTP account with a filename of “[participant’s IP
address] question[question numbers].wav”. Because MTurk
automatically collects a participant’s IP address, the answers
to a survey can be linked to a participant’s audio files.

Fig. 3  Editing an MTurk survey to include the VOIS code within the design

13

Behavior Research Methods

Fig. 4  Example of the final appearance of an MTurk survey that includes the VOIS code

Example 2: Collecting voice data on Qualtrics
Similar to MTurk, the popular survey collection platform,
Qualtrics, allows researchers to edit the HTML of a given
question and link JavaScript files. To implement the VOIS
program, researchers should create a “text” question, without
any response options. Then in the question, click on “HTML
view” and paste the code for a single voice recording prompt
(Fig. 5).
The researcher’s user token should be entered in the code.
Qualtrics allows researchers to preview the survey, and the
voice recording element should be usable within the preview
view (Fig. 6).
For additional voice prompts, the researcher should create
additional questions, and enter the code again, changing the
1’s to 2’s in the code for the second question, as described
in the section on multiple voice recordings. For multiple
recordings, it is important to only include the following part
of the code only once, after the last question:

Fig. 6  Example of the final appearance of a Qualtrics survey that
includes the VOIS code

Fig. 5  Editing a Qualtrics survey to include the VOIS code within the design

13

Behavior Research Methods

If the researcher desires to have VOIS save the audio
recording as MP3s, they should use the following line
instead:

Example 3: Collecting voice data on a self‑hosted
website
Some researchers use self-hosted websites, which is a website where a researcher hosts and designs all of the questions using HTML and records the data using a server-side
language (e.g., PHP, PERL, ASP). These websites are also
compatible with the proposed method, and follow the same
process. The researcher would create an HTML page, beginning with the <html> and </html> tags. Within the HTML
tags the <body> </body> tags are inserted, which indicate
the visible content of the page. Within the body tags would
be the <form> and </form> tags that display the survey
form elements. Within the form would go the survey question elements. That section is where the VOIS code would
be copied and pasted. In the figure below, we show a survey with three text inputs and two voice recording prompts
(Fig. 7). After pasting the code and creating the other survey
elements, the HTML file can be hosted as usual with the

elements visible to the researcher (Fig. 8). The researcher
would collect the participant’s IP address using the script
that processes the rest of the survey data collection, such as
the PHP script.

Conducting a study with VOIS
To conduct an online study using VOIS, researchers would
follow the instructions of their typical verbal protocol
method. The only modification would be to direct participants themselves when to press the record button and when
to end it. The code has a built-in audio player, which allows
participants to confirm successful recording. Therefore, participants should be instructed to verify that the data recorded
properly, using the playback option, before submitting or
moving to the next page.
Researchers must collect the participant’s IP address during the study, which is typically done by default on major
survey platforms. Researchers are already advised to collect IP addresses, when possible, because of their ability to
minimize repeat responses and to ensure the participant’s
location is within a given region. It is necessary to collect
the IP address because the filenames of every recording
begin with the IP address and contain the question number.
This naming system allows researchers to match a participant’s voice recording to their nonverbal responses on the
survey. Therefore, it is essential that researchers verify that

Fig. 7  Editing a self-hosted HTML survey to include the VOIS code within the design

13

Behavior Research Methods

specific IP address. The cryptographic hash of the IP address
does so by providing a unique identifier without any overlap
between the provided hash and password.

Discussion

Fig. 8  Example of the final appearance of a self-hosted HTML survey
that includes the VOIS code

the survey collecting the audio recording has IP address collection enabled.
Downloading audio data
After conducting the study, the researcher will have a collection of audio files saved on their server. The researcher
can either leave the files on the server or download them
all to their local computer. Each audio file begins with the
participant’s IP address. Therefore, researchers coding the
content of the audio file can easily associate the file to the
participant’s other answers by sorting the survey file by IP
address.
While there may be issues that could emerge with IP
address stability in terms of identifying participants via a
link with their IP address and voice data, this issue of stability is only of concern between sessions (Dennis et al.,
2020). Stability of an IP address within a session is stable.
Therefore, as long as researchers are trying to connect data
within a session, there should be no issues in guaranteeing
IP address stability. If a researcher provides a token for the
participant to use in a single session, then their associated
IP address could possibly be linked. However, to provide
security for the respondent, VOIS utilizes a cryptographic
hash of the participant’s IP address, which is still unique for
a single respondent, but reveals no information about their

13

In this article, we have presented VOIS, a collection of code
written in HTML and JavaScript for collecting vocal data
online. VOIS provides a tool for researchers that was previously unavailable and allows for vocal protocol methods to
be implemented in third-party survey platforms. No current
widely available methods for online vocal data collection via
third-party survey platforms exists. Therefore, we provide
the most user-friendly and accessible means to gather vocal
data without sacrificing any data richness. VOIS offers a
simple solution to allow researchers to collect vocal data
outside of the lab, providing access to larger sample sizes.
Therefore, this web-based verbal protocol implementation
provides a more scalable method of collection and a less
effortful participant and researcher experience. By introducing VOIS, we provide a previously unknown need for
researchers interested in utilizing verbal protocol methods.
VOIS can be easily implemented into many third-party
survey platforms such as MTurk and Qualtrics (or platforms like Prolific that link to outside surveys like Qualtrics), which allow for the addition of custom JavaScript and
HTML code. VOIS uses a standard code across all platforms
that the researcher can copy and paste into the desired survey platform; therefore, no prior programming experience
is needed to benefit from this method.

Survey integration suggestions2
Outside of the suggested implementation of VOIS as an integration to existing surveys maintained on survey platforms
or as a central component of a new study located on a survey
platform, researchers may find additional and more creative
uses for VOIS software. Due to the ease of use and accessibility of VOIS, researchers from many fields can now supplement their research with vocal data collection, especially
using survey platforms they are already familiar with. VOIS
allows researchers to integrate the collection of vocal data
with other question types, which can create opportunities for
unique usages of the proposed VOIS software. We provide
several suggestions to researchers as to a few ways verbal
data may be relevantly incorporated into their studies.

2

We want to thank one of our manuscript reviewers, Dr. Aaron J.
Moss, for the insightful suggestions of additional ways to incorporate
our proposed method.

Behavior Research Methods

Implementing VOIS into a survey online could allow
researchers to replace long written tasks with think-aloud tasks
by asking participants to record their responses instead of typing them out. This could potentially increase the response rate
for the question or manipulation due to decreased participant
effort. Additionally, participants could complete the question
more efficiently and the researcher could then include more
survey items without too much additional participant effort
or worrying about survey fatigue. Similarly, VOIS could be
used in survey manipulations to gain insight into participant
engagement and involvement. For example, researchers could
ask participants to vocally respond to a survey manipulation
and get an idea of engagement from the length and thoughtfulness of the participant’s response.
Another way of using VOIS in existing survey platforms is as a comprehension check. This could be useful to
researchers across a wide range of disciplines given common
issues about data quality and response rates in online studies
(Deutskens et al., 2004; Evans & Mathur, 2005). To do so,
researchers could include an item that incorporates VOIS
and asks participants to repeat back a set of survey instructions to verify understanding as a means of quality check.
If the participant seems to vocalize instructions that seem
different or seem that they misunderstood the methods, it
could be a means to exclude their responses. Additionally,
it may seem more natural for participants to verbally report
back their understanding or interpretation of instructions as
opposed to typing them out, where it may be tempting to just
copy the provided instructions instead.
VOIS can also be useful to a wide variety of researchers
as an additional think-aloud question at the end of a study
to ask participants for feedback on the overall survey experience. Participants may not want to go through the effort
or feel that it is not relevant to reach out to the researchers
via email to express any issues with their survey experience. However, if this was included in the survey as an
easy-to-respond-to vocal response question, participants
might be more motivated to provide unique insight that
could help researchers adjust their surveys for a better participant experience in the future. Using VOIS in this manner can help avoid researchers from continuing to include
confusing tasks or having participants misinterpret aspects
of the study by providing insight that the researcher may
not otherwise have access to.
VOIS can also provide a previously unavailable way to
measure creativity within a survey platform design or an
already created survey. Traditional measures of creativity
can be open-ended and thus hard to interpret or assess.
Commonly used measures of creativity may also be dated
and incompatible with implementation into an online survey design (Guilford, 1967). However, those creativity
measures that are currently utilized in an online format
can only be enhanced by VOIS. For example, creativity

speed tests (versus power tests) that measure how many
items or responses a participant knows or comes up with
in a certain amount of time can be more easily and quickly
completed in a single vocal recording. This ensures that
participants who are slower at typing are not at a disadvantage and thus provides the researchers with more variance
in participant responses. In addition to creativity, vocal
protocol via VOIS could be substituted for commonly
typed measures like verbal reasoning. This substitution
can assist researchers in a general methodological way by
enabling them to cut participants off at a certain length
of recording in order to keep all recorded data consistent and the same length, avoiding any unnecessary data
preprocessing in the form of trimming audio. Researchers
would also be able to control the exact amount of time
participants spend on a task by only allowing participants
a certain amount of recording time.
Another example of a construct that can be measured
more effectively by utilizing VOIS is a participant’s certainty. Certainty as a self-report measure can be easy to lie
on or may not capture nuances of the true nature of a participant’s certainty of a response. Specifically, VOIS allows
for researchers to measure certainty through a participant’s
vocal behavior. These behaviors can capture specifics of a
participant’s response like their hesitation through “ums”
or time spent gathering their thoughts, as well as their tonal
porosity. Including these vocal behaviors in measuring
certainty in an online study can potentially redefine how
response certainty is measured.
Some additional replacements using VOIS to capture
vocal recordings instead of typed or selected input include
usage with situational judgment tests (SJTs). SJTs are used
across a wide range of disciplines to measure various different constructs using participants’ reported potential
behavioral responses (Corstjens et al., 2017; Patterson
et al., 2012). In responding to SJTs, participants are usually
asked to evaluate several potential behavioral responses to
a situation, all which vary in potential degree of plausibility
or appropriateness in effectiveness (Webster et al., 2020).
Having a participant respond vocally to SJTs can allow
for more response variance as well as ease of responding
and potentially more reflective survey responses of actual
behavioral responses. In general, using VOIS as a means to
capture vocal recoding in an online survey can allow for the
measurement of constructs more effectively than previously
available in online survey platforms. This can include the
measurement of constructs such as microaggressions or
covert discrimination in order to capture more authenticity in participants’ responses. Constructs such as competency, teaching ability, warmness, or fluency can also be
more effectively captured using VOIS implemented in an
online survey. These types of constructs that are typically
measured via self-report are better captured using vocal

13

Behavior Research Methods

Limitations

Not all researchers may currently have an FTP hosting service. However, most researchers are able to obtain access to
their own FTP hosting for free or at a minimal cost. Many
sites exist that provide free FTP hosting. Often this hosting
is limited in terms of total file storage size or upload size.
Researchers who require more flexibility in file sizes can use
paid hosting plans, which are typically offered for a monthly
cost around US minimum wage. This expense is therefore
roughly the cost of a single participant, and only needs to
be used for the length of the data collection. Additionally,
the most popular router brands (i.e., Netgear, Linksys, and
Cisco) all provide the ability to turn the router into an FTP
server. By turning this option on in the router settings page,
researchers will receive the login URL needed to generate an access token (Fig. 9). This option, while free, may
require some technical expertise and may not always apply,
as it requires that the researcher has a static IP address
(which most residential Internet accounts do not).
Routers that have ReadySHARE capabilities and are enabled as an FTP server store transferred files on a USB drive
the researcher plugs into the router. Even without a router,
software, such as FileZilla Server, IndiFTPD, and Xlight
are freely available, which turn any computer into an FTP
server (though the computer should be one that remains on
at all times and has a static IP address assigned to it). We
recommend nontechnical researchers obtain a low-cost web
host (e.g., X10pr​emium.​com) as it will be quicker and more
reliable than a personally run solution.

Requiring an FTP hosting server

Increased data file size

The current method records audio and stores the data as a
WAV file on the researcher’s FTP server. This method is
intended to coincide with data retention plans that often
require the data to be stored on password-protected systems.

Audio data provides a richer view of a response compared to
plain text, with the disadvantage of requiring more storage
space to record. The proposed method saves the audio data as
an uncompressed WAV format, offering maximum fidelity. As

recording due to the additional data of tone, vocal porosity,
hesitation, or speed found in recorded speech, enabling a
more subjective measurement of such constructs.
Finally, VOIS could be used as a means of data integrity
validation for online surveys conducted using survey platforms—specifically, to deter instances of curbstoning, or
survey data fabrication by third parties. Due to the difficulty
of fabricating large amounts of participants’ vocal recordings, potential fabricators would be required to actually put
in more work to fabricate responses if VOIS was included
as a response option. Additionally, alternative proposed
methods using participants’ responses to innocuous questions and matching response distributions to the expected
known distribution of typical, non-fabricated responses can
be facilitated using VOIS (Hernandez et al., 2021). The proposed method in Hernandez et al. (2021) suggests using a
combination of common questions that participants can easily respond to in order to check for deviations from expected
statistical distributions. These include asking participants
for non-identifying, but easy to answer questions such as
their address number, birthdate, or the last four digits of
their phone number. If answering these questions is done
via participant vocal response, this method of data integrity validation can be made more robust against instances
of curbstoning through more accurate and efficient data
authentication.

Fig. 9  Enabling a household router with ReadySHARE to serve as an FTP server

13

Behavior Research Methods

a result, some data files will be noticeably larger. A minute of
audio is approximately 5 megabytes. When collected on 200
participants (the sample size needed to have 80% power for
detecting effect sizes of r = .20 at an alpha level of 5%), the
survey size would be roughly 1 gigabyte. Therefore, researchers need to have at least 1 gigabyte of storage space on their
hard drives per prompt, if a prompt takes 1 minute to record.
To address this limitation, we also offer a version of VOIS
that saves MP3 files instead of uncompressed WAV files. MP3
files use lossy compression to reduce file size, while retaining
most of the psychoacoustic fidelity. When using a bitrate of
160 kilobytes per second, the audio is approximately 1 MB
per minute. All that researchers need to do to save MP3s is to
change the link from vois.js to voismp3.js in the src section
of the script tag.
For example, instead of writing at the bottom of the page:

The researcher would write:

Additional effort for physiological data
Our implementation can only enable the additional collection of audio data. While the implementation can easily be
supplemented by survey data in the same platform, several
studies use other means of data collection in addition to
verbal protocol methods. Therefore, researchers are limited to only collecting types of data supported by the survey platform’s available question types and methodology;
in addition to vocal data supported via VOIS implementation. If supplementary data is desired, researchers would
have to couple it with additional means of collection. Supplementary data could include more physiological-based
measures that may be of interest to researchers collecting
vocal data. For example, researchers may want to supplement vocal data with the collection of eye movement,
blood pressure, cortisol levels, heart rate, or other physiological measures that are not easily integrated into existing survey platforms.
These additional collection means that are not supported
by VOIS may not be as easily applied to a survey platform
and can be a potential drawback compared to more traditional verbal protocol methods.

implementation allowing for larger sample sizes and thus
more vocal data, there may be issues in the analysis of a
large amount of vocal data. Additionally, vocal data is coded
in specific ways that can be labor- and time-intensive. Combined with the larger amount of vocal data, this could provide a potential drawback to researchers. However, there
are many techniques of handling large amounts of data that
exist. Deep neural networks offer speech-to-text analysis that
rivals human transcription. These neural networks are provided as free and open-source software that allows researchers to provide the audio file and receive the transcribed text
in seconds. Additionally, researchers can use this text-tospeech software without any programming ability.

Conclusion
To summarize, this article has presented VOIS, a method for
collecting verbal protocol data via third-party survey platforms. The implementation of VOIS in the presented survey
platforms allows researchers to collect vocal data in a more
user-friendly and localized manner. Researchers can simply copy and paste the HTML code into the desired survey
platform and follow the provided step-by-step instructions
within the manuscript to adapt the protocol as needed. With
the movement to more work being done remotely and the
inability to currently adapt some in-lab study procedures,
such as vocal recording protocols, to an at-home environment, our proposed method provides an advantage for
researchers across fields.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​s13428-​022-​02045-6.
Authors’ contributions I.H. conceptualized the presented idea. T.R.
developed the theoretical foundation and wrote most of the manuscript
with support from I.H. I.H. developed the software code. T.R. created
the tables and I.H. created the figures for visualization purposes. T.R.
provided oversight and planning of the manuscript with assistance from
I.H. T.R. and I.H. contributed to the final revisions and edits of the
manuscript.
Data availability The materials generated and/or analyzed during the
current study are available at the following Open Science Repository
link: https://​osf.​io/​msj7h/?​view_​only=​52bd8​769dc​f54df​7b2ea​aa30b​
49276​52
Code availability The code generated for this article is available at the
following Open Science Repository link: https://​osf.​io/​msj7h/?​view_​
only=​52bd8​769dc​f54df​7b2ea​aa30b​49276​52

Declarations

Post‑processing

Conflicts of interest The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare
that are relevant to the content of this article.

Lastly, our implementation may provide difficulties
to researchers in the usage of provided data. With the

Ethics approval This is a code-based study where no human subjects
were included. The Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State Univer-

13

Behavior Research Methods
sity Human Research Protection Program confirmed that no ethical
approval is required.
Consent to participate This is a code-based study where no human
subjects were included. Therefore, no informed consent to participate
is necessary.
Consent for publication This is a code-based study where no human subjects were included. Therefore, no consent for publication is necessary.

References
Atman, C. J., & Bursic, K. M. (1998). Verbal protocol analysis as a
method to document engineering student design processes. Journal of Engineering Education, 87(2), 121–132. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1002/j.​2168-​9830.​1998.​tb003​32.x
Austin, J., & Delaney, P. F. (1998). Protocol analysis as a tool for
behavior analysis. The Analysis of Verbal Behavior, 15(1), 41–56.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​BF033​92922
Biggs, S. F., Rosman, A. J., & Sergenian, G. K. (1993). Methodological issues in judgment and decision-making research: Concurrent verbal protocol validity and simultaneous traces of process.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 6(3), 187–206. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1002/​bdm.​39600​60303
Boas, T. C., Christenson, D. P., & Glick, D. M. (2018). Recruiting
large online samples in the United States and India: Facebook,
Mechanical Turk, and Qualtrics. Political Science Research and
Methods, 1-19. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​psrm.​2018.​28
Brandon, D. M., Long, J. H., Loraas, T. M., Mueller-Phillips, J., &
Vansant, B. (2014). Online instrument delivery and participant
recruitment services: Emerging opportunities for behavioral
accounting research. Behavioral Research in Accounting, 26(1),
1–23. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2308/​bria-​50651
Buchanan, E. A., & Hvizdak, E. E. (2009). Online survey tools:
Ethical and methodological concerns of human research ethics
committees. Journal of Empirical Research on Human Research
Ethics, 4(2), 37–48. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1525/​jer.​2009.4.​2.​37
Cauldron Science. (2016, October 1). Gorilla: Web audio zone.
Retrieved December 2021, from https://​suppo​rt.​goril​la.​sc/​suppo​
rt/​refer​ence/​task-​build​er-​zones#​webau​dio
Charters, E. (2003). The use of think-aloud methods in qualitative
research: An introduction to think-aloud methods. Brock Education: A Journal of Educational Research and Practice, 12(2).
https://​doi.​org/​10.​26522/​brock​ed.​v12i2.​38
Cheung, J. H., Burns, D. K., Sinclair, R. R., & Sliter, M. (2017). Amazon Mechanical Turk in organizational psychology: An evaluation
and practical recommendations. Journal of Business and Psychology, 32(4), 347–361. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10869-​016-​9458-5
Chi, M. T. (1997). Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data:
A practical guide. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6(3),
271–315. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1207/​s1532​7809j​ls0603_1
Cohen, D., Casner, S., & Forgie, J. W. (1981). A Network Voice Protocol (NVP-II). University of Southern California/Information
Sciences Institute, 71. https://​www.​rfc-​editor.​org/​rfc/​rfc741.​html
Corstjens, J., Lievens, F., & Krumm, S. (2017). Situational judgement
tests for selection. The Wiley Blackwell Handbook of the Psychology of Recruitment, Selection and Employee Retention, 226–246.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​97811​18972​472.​ch11
Crutcher, R. J. (1994). Telling what we know: The use of verbal report
methodologies in psychological research. Psychological Science,
5(5), 241–241. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1467-​9280.​1994.​tb006​
19.x

13

Deffner, G., Snyder, H. L., Bittner Jr, A. C., Rhenius, D., & Sanderson, P. M. (1990, October). Verbal protocols as a research tool in
human factors: Panel discussion. In: Proceedings of the Human
Factors Society Annual Meeting, 34(16), 1145-1147. SAGE Publications. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​15419​31290​03401​718
Dennis, S. A., Goodson, B. M., & Pearson, C. A. (2020). Online worker
fraud and evolving threats to the integrity of MTurk data: A discussion of virtual private servers and the limitations of IP-based
screening procedures. Behavioral Research in Accounting, 32(1),
119–134. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2308/​bria-​18-​044
Deutskens, E., De Ruyter, K., Wetzels, M., & Oosterveld, P. (2004).
Response rate and response quality of internet-based surveys: An
experimental study. Marketing Letters, 15(1), 21–36. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1023/B:​MARK.​00000​21968.​86465.​00
Diamond, M. (2016). Recorderjs, GitHub repository. Retrieved December 2021, from https://​github.​com/​mattd​iamond/​Recor​derjs
Dugger, T. (2018). Kitura-Test, GitHub repository. Retrieved December
2021, from https://​github.​com/​troyi​bm/​kitura-​test
Ericsson, K. A. (2006). Protocol analysis and expert thought: Concurrent verbalizations of thinking during experts’ performance on
representative tasks. The Cambridge Handbook of Expertise and
Expert Performance, 223–241. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​CBO97​
80511​816796.​013
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1998). How to study thinking in
everyday life: Contrasting think-aloud protocols with descriptions
and explanations of thinking. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 5(3),
178–186. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1207/​s1532​7884m​ca0503_3
Evans, J. R., & Mathur, A. (2005). The value of online surveys. Internet
Research, 15(2), 195–219. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​10662​24051​
05903​60
Gomila, R., Littman, R., Blair, G., & Paluck, E. L. (2017). The audio
check: A method for improving data quality and detecting data
fabrication. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 8(4),
424–433. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​19485​50617​691101
Goode, B. (2002, September). Voice over internet protocol (VoIP). In:
Proceedings of the IEEE, 90(9), 1495-1517. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1109/​JPROC.​2002.​802005
Goodman, J. I., Brady, M. P., Duffy, M. L., Scott, J., & Pollard, N. E.
(2008). The effects of “bug-in-ear” supervision on special education teachers' delivery of learn units. Focus on autism and other
developmental disabilities, 23(4), 207–216. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1177/​10883​57608​324713
Gouveia, R., & Karapanos, E. (2013, April). Footprint tracker: supporting diary studies with lifelogging. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2921-2930.
ACM. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​24706​54.​24814​05
Guilford, J. P. (1967). Creativity: Yesterday, today and tomorrow.
The Journal of Creative Behavior, 1(1), 3–14. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1002/j.​2162-​6057.​1967.​tb000​02.x
Harrison, D. E., & Krauss, S. I. (2002). Interviewer cheating: Implications for research on entrepreneurship in Africa. Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship, 7(3), 319.
Hernandez, I., Ristow, T., Hauenstein, M (2022). Curbing curbstoning: Distributional methods to detect data fabrication. Psychological Methods.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​met00​00403
Hoffman, K. A., Aitken, L. M., & Duffield, C. (2009). A comparison of novice and expert nurses’ cue collection during clinical
decision-making: Verbal protocol analysis. International Journal
of Nursing Studies, 46(10), 1335–1344. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
ijnur​stu.​2009.​04.​001
Hughes, J., & Parkes, S. (2003). Trends in the use of verbal protocol
analysis in software engineering research. Behaviour & Information Technology, 22(2), 127–140. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​01449​
29031​00008​1341

Behavior Research Methods
Isenberg, D. J. (1986). Thinking and managing: A verbal protocol
analysis of managerial problem solving. Academy of Management
Journal, 29(4), 775–788. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5465/​255944
Jones, W. S., Cotton, T., & Holland, R. V. (2000). U.S. Patent No.
6,141,341. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Kasper, G. (1998). Analysing verbal protocols. Tesol Quarterly, 32(2),
358–362. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2307/​35875​91
Keromytis, A. D. (2009, December). A survey of voice over IP security research. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on
Information Systems Security, 1-17. Springer. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​978-3-​642-​10772-6_1
Krahmer, E., & Ummelen, N. (2004). Thinking about thinking aloud:
A comparison of two verbal protocols for usability testing. IEEE
Transactions on Professional Communication, 47(2), 105–117.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TPC.​2004.​828205
Kraiger, K., Sanchez, D. R., & McGonagle, A. K. (2019). What’s in a
sample? Comparison of effect size replication and response quality across student, MTurk, and Qualtrics samples. https://​www.​
sgu.​ru/​sites/​defau​lt/​files/​sampl​es_​paper.​pdf
Litt, M. D., Cooney, N. L., & Morse, P. (1998). Ecological momentary assessment (EMA) with treated alcoholics: Methodological
problems and potential solutions. Health Psychology, 17(1), 48.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1037/​0278-​6133.​17.1.​48
Mathur, M. B., & Reichling, D. B. (2019). Open-source software for
mouse-tracking in Qualtrics to measure category competition.
Behavior Research Methods, 51(5), 1–11. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​
s13428-​019-​01258-6
Mehl, M. R., Pennebaker, J. W., Crow, D. M., Dabbs, J., & Price,
J. H. (2001). The Electronically Activated Recorder (EAR): A
device for sampling naturalistic daily activities and conversations.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 33(4),
517–523. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3758/​BF031​95410
Miyane, Y. (2016). WebAudioRecorder.js, GitHub repository.
Retrieved December 2021, from https://​github.​com/​higuma/​web-​
audio-​recor​der-​js
OSWeb. (2020). Running experiments online. Retrieved December
2021, from https://​osdoc.​cogsci.​nl/3.​2/​manual/​osweb/#​jatos
Patterson, F., Ashworth, V., Zibarras, L., Coan, P., Kerrin, M., &
O’Neill, P. (2012). Evaluations of situational judgement tests
to assess non-academic attributes in selection. Medical Education, 46(9), 850–868. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1365-​2923.​2012.​
04336.x
Phonic. (2019). Phonic documentation. Retrieved December 2021,
from https://​docs.​phonic.​ai/
Pipe Services S.R.L. (2015). Video and audio recording clients and
infrastructure. Retrieved December 2021, from https://​addpi​pe.​
com/
PsychoJS. (2021). GitHub repository. Retrieved December 2021, from
https://​github.​com/​psych​opy/​psych​ojs
PsychoPy. (2018). PsychoPy: Now running studies online. Retrieved
December 2021, from https://​www.​psych​opy.​org/#​online
PsyToolkit. (2022). About PsyToolkit. Retrieved December 2021, from
https://​www.​psyto​olkit.​org/

Schkade, D. A., & Payne, J. W. (1994). How people respond to contingent valuation questions: A verbal protocol analysis of willingness
to pay for an environmental regulation. Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, 26(1), 88–109. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1006/​jeem.​1994.​1006
Sondhi, S., Khan, M., Vijay, R., & Salhan, A. K. (2015). Vocal indicators of emotional stress. International Journal of Computer Applications, 122(15). https://​doi.​org/​10.​5120/​21780​5056
Trickett, S. B., & Trafton, J. G. (2009). A primer on verbal protocol
analysis. The PSI Handbook of Virtual Environments for Training
and Education, 332–346.
Van Selm, M., & Jankowski, N. W. (2006). Conducting online surveys.
Quality and Quantity, 40(3), 435–456. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s11135-​005-​8081-8
Van Someren, M. W., Barnard, Y. F., & Sandberg, J. A. C. (1994). The
think aloud method: A practical approach to modelling cognitive.
Academic Press.
Vosberg, E. (2021). crypto-js, GitHub repository. Retrieved December
2021, from https://​github.​com/​brix/​crypto-​js
Webster, E. S., Paton, L. W., Crampton, P. E., & Tiffin, P. A. (2020).
Situational judgement test validity for selection: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Medical Education, 54(10), 888–902.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​medu.​14201
Wirth, O., Chase, P. N., & Munson, K. J. (2000). Experimental analysis of human vocal behavior: Applications of speech-recognition
technology. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior,
74(3), 363–375. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1901/​jeab.​2000.​74-​363
Wright, K. B. (2005). Researching Internet-based populations: Advantages and disadvantages of online survey research, online questionnaire authoring software packages, and web survey services.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 10(3). https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1083-​6101.​2005.​tb002​59.x
Zainal Abidin, S., Christoforidou, D., & Liem, A. (2009). Thinking and
re-thinking verbal protocol analysis in design research. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Engineering Design,
Vol. 2. Design Theory and Research Methodology.
Open practices statement All code is available at the Open Science
Repository, as described within the manuscript. The repository can
also be located at: https://​osf.​io/​msj7h/?​view_​only=​52bd8​769dc​f54df​
7b2ea​aa30b​49276​52
The raw bibliometric data on the frequency of online studies is
available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.
No experiments were conducted or preregistered.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a society or other partner) holds
exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the
author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted
manuscript version of this article is solely governed by the terms of
such publishing agreement and applicable law.

13

